　　Faust

　　by Johann W.  Geothe

　　Translated by Anna Swanwick  ( 1808 )

　　Introductory Note

　　Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, the greatest of German men of letters, wasborn at Frankfort-on-the-Main, August 28, 1749. His father was a man ofmeans and position, and he personally supervised the early education of hisson. The young Goethe studied at the universities of Leipsig and Strasburg,and in 1772 entered upon the practise of law at Wetzlar. At the invitation ofKarl August, Duke of Saxe-Weimar, he went in 1775 to live in Weimar,where he held a succession of political offices, becoming the Duke's chiefadviser. From 1786 to 1788 he traveled in Italy, and from 1791 to 1817directed the ducal theater at Weimar. He took part in the wars againstFrance, 1792-3, and in the following year began his friendship with Schiller,which lasted till the latter's death in 1805. In 1806 he married ChristianeVulpius. From about 1794 he devoted himself chiefly to literature, and after alife of extraordinary productiveness died at Weimar, March 22, 1832. Themost important of Goethe's works produced before he went to Weimar werehis tragedy "Gotz von Berlichingen" (1773), which first brought him fame, and"The Sorrows of Young Werther," a novel which obtained enormouspopularity during the so called "Sturm und Drang" period. During the years atWeimar before he knew Schiller he began "Wilhelm Meister," wrote thedramas, "Iphigenie," "Egmont," and "Torquato Tasso," and his "ReineckeFuchs." To the period of his friendship with Schiller belong the continuation of"Wilhelm Meister," the beautiful idyl of "Hermann and Dorothea," and the"Roman Elegies." In the last period, between Schiller's death in 1805 and hisown, appeared "Faust," "Elective Affinities," his autobiographical "Dichtungund Wahrheit" ("Poetry and Truth"), his "Italian Journey," much scientificwork, and a series of treatises on German Art.Though the foregoing enumeration contains but a selection from the titles ofGoethe's best known writings, it suffices to show the extraordinary fertility andversatility of his genius. Rarely has a man of letters had so full and varied a life,or been capable of so many-sided a development. His political and scientificactivities, though dwarfed in the eyes of our generation by his artisticproduction, yet showed the adaptability of his talent in the most diversedirections, and helped to give him that balance of temper and breadth ofvision in which he has been surpassed by no genius of the ancient or modernworld.

　　The greatest and most representative expression of Goethe's powers iswithout doubt to be found in his drama of "Faust"; but before dealing withGoethe's masterpiece, it is worth while to say something of the history of thestory on which it is founded - the most famous instance of the old andwidespread legend of the man who sold his soul to the devil. The historicalDr. Faust seems to have been a self-called philosopher who traveled aboutGermany in the first half of the sixteenth century, making money by thepractise of magic, fortune-telling, and pretended cures. He died mysteriouslyabout 1540, and a legend soon sprang up that the devil, by whose aid hewrought his wonders, had finally carried him off. In 1587 a life of himappeared, in which are attributed to him many marvelous exploits and inwhich he is held up as an awful warning against the excessive desire forsecular learning and admiration for antique beauty which characterized thehumanist movement of the time. In this aspect the Faust legend is anexpression of early popular Protestantism, and of its antagonism to thescientific and classical tendencies of the Renaissance.While a succession of Faust books were appearing in Germany, the originallife was translated into English and dramatized by Marlowe. English playersbrought Marlowe's work back to Germany, where it was copied by Germanactors, degenerated into spectacular farce, and finally into a puppet show.Through this puppet show Goethe made acquaintance with the legend.By the time that Goethe was twenty, the Faust legend had fascinated hisimagination; for three years before he went to Weimar he had been workingon scattered scenes and bits of dialogue; and though he suspended actualcomposition on it during three distinct periods, it was always to resume, andhe closed his labors upon it only with his life. Thus the period of time betweenhis first experiments and the final touches is more than sixty years. During thisperiod the plans for the structure and the signification of the work inevitablyunderwent profound modifications, and these have naturally affected the unityof the result; but, on the other hand, this long companionship and persistentrecurrence to the task from youth to old age have made it in a unique way therecord of Goethe's personality in all its richness and diversity.The drama was given to the public first as a fragment in 1790; then thecompleted First Part appeared in 1808; and finally the Second Part waspublished in 1833, the year after the author's death. Writing in "Dichtung undWahrheit" of the period about 1770, when he was in Strasburg with Herder,Goethe says, "The significant puppet - play legend . . . echoed and buzzed inmany tones within me. I too had drifted about in all knowledge, and earlyenough had been brought to feel the vanity of it. I too had made all sorts ofexperiments in life, and had always come back more unsatisfied and moretormented. I was now carrying these things, like many others, about with meand delighting myself with them in lonely hours, but without writing anythingdown." Without going into the details of the experience which underlies thesewords, we can see the beginning of that sympathy with the hero of the oldstory that was the basis of its fascination and that accounted for Goethe'sdeparture from the traditional catastrophe of Faust's damnation.Hungarian March from the "Damnation of Faust"Op.24 by HectorBerlioz(1803 - 1869).

　　Of the elements in the finished Faust that are derived from the legend a roughidea may be obtained from the "Doctor Faustus" of Marlowe, printed in thepresent volume. As early as 1674 a life of Faust had contained the incident ofthe philosopher's falling in love with a servant - girl; but the developed story ofGretchen is Goethe's own. The other elements added to the plot can be notedby a comparison with Marlowe.

　　It need hardly be said that Goethe's "Faust" does not derive its greatness fromits conformity to the traditional standards of what a tragedy should be. Hehimself was accustomed to refer to it cynically as a monstrosity, and yet heput himself into it as intensely as Dante put himself into "The Divine Comedy."A partial explanation of this apparent contradiction in the author's attitude is tobe found in what has been said of its manner of composition. Goethe began itin his romantic youth, and availed himself recklessly of the supernaturalelements in the legend, with the disregard of reason and plausibilitycharacteristic of the romantic mood. When he returned to it in the beginning ofthe new century his artistic standards has changed, and the supernaturalismcould now be tolerated only by being made symbolic. Thus he makes thecareer of Faust as a whole emblematic of the triumph of the persistent strivingfor the ideal over the temptation to find complete satisfaction in the sense, andprepares the reader for this interpretation by prefixing the "Prologue inHeaven." The elaboration of this symbolic element is responsible for suchscenes as the Walpurgis - Night and the Intermezzo scenes full of power andinfinitely suggestive, but destructive of the unity of the play as a tragedy ofhuman life. Yet there remains in this First Part even in its final form much thatis realistic in the best sense, the carousal in Auerbach's cellar, the portrait ofMartha, the Easter - morning walk, the character and fate of Margaret. It issuch elements as these that have appealed to the larger reading public and thathave naturally been emphasized by performance on the stage, and by virtue ofthese alone "Faust" may rank as a great drama; but it is the result of Goethe'sbroodings on the mystery of human life, shadowed forth in the symbolic partsand elaborated with still greater complexity and still more far - reachingsuggestiveness - and, it must be added, with deepening obscurity - in theSecond Part, that have given the work its place with "Job," with the"Prometheus Bound," with "The Divine Comedy," and with "Hamlet."The Tragedy Of Faust - Dedication

　　Ye wavering shapes, again ye do enfold me, As erst upon my troubled sightye stole; Shall I this time attempt to clasp, to hold ye? Still for the fond illusionyearns my soul? Ye press around! Come then, your captive hold me, Asupward from the vapoury mist ye roll; Within my breast youth's throbbingpulse is bounding, Fann'd by the magic breath your march surrounding.Shades fondly loved appear, your train attending, And visions fair of many ablissful day; First - love and friendship their fond accents blending, Like tosome ancient, half - expiring lay; Sorrow revives, her wail of anguish sendingBack o'er life's devious labyrinthine way, And names the dear ones, theywhom Fate bereaving Of life's fair hours, left me behind them grieving.They hear me not my later cadence singing, The souls to whom my earlier laysI sang; Dispersed the throng, their severed flight now winging; Mute are thevoices that responsive rang. For stranger crowds the Orphean lyre nowstringing, E'en their applause is to my heart a pang; Of old who listened to mysong, glad hearted, If yet they live, now wander widely parted.A yearning long unfelt, each impulse swaying, To yon calm spirit - realmuplifts my soul; In faltering cadence, as when Zephyr playing, Fans theAeolian harp, my numbers roll; Tear follows tear, my steadfast heart obeyingThe tender impulse, loses its control; What I possess as from afar I see;Those I have lost become realities to me.

　　Prologue For The Theatre

　　Manager. Dramatic Poet. Merryman.

　　Manager

　　Ye twain, in trouble and distress True friends whom I so oft have found, Say,for our scheme on German ground, What prospect have we of success? Fainwould I please the public, win their thanks; They live and let live, hence it isbut meet. The posts are now erected, and the planks, And all look forward toa festal treat. Their places taken, they, with eyebrows rais'd, Sit patiently, andfain would be amaz'd. I know the art to hit the public taste, Yet ne'er of failurefelt so keen a dread; True, they are not accustomed to the best, But thenappalling the amount they've read. How make our entertainment striking, new,And yet significant and pleasing too? For to be plain, I love to see the throng,As to our booth the living tide progresses; As wave on wave successive rollsalong, And through heaven's narrow portal forceful presses; Still in broaddaylight, ere the clock strikes four, With blows their way towards the boxthey take; And, as for bread in famine, at the baker's door, For tickets arecontent their necks to break. Such various minds the bard alone can sway,My friend, oh work this miracle to - day!

　　Poet

　　Oh of the motley throng speak not before me, At whose aspect the Spiritwings its flight! Conceal the surging concourse, I implore thee, Whose vortexdraws us with resistless might. No, to some peaceful heavenly nook restoreme, Where only for the bard blooms pure delight, Where love and friendshipyield their choicest blessing, Our heart's true bliss, with god - like handcaressing.

　　What in the spirit's depths was there created, What shyly there the lip shapedforth in sound; A failure now, with words now fitly mated, In the wild tumultof the hour is drown'd; Full oft the poet's thought for years hath waited Untilat length with perfect form 'tis crowned; What dazzles, for the moment born,must perish; What genuine is posterity will cherish.Merryman

　　This cant about posterity I hate; About posterity were I to prate, Who thenthe living would amuse? For they Will have diversion, ay, and 'tis their due. Asprightly fellow's presence at your play, Methinks should also count forsomething too; Whose genial wit the audience still inspires, Knows from theirchangeful mood no angry feeling; A wider circle he desires, To their heart'sdepths more surely thus appealing. To work, then! Give a master - piece, myfriend; Bring Fancy with her choral trains before us, Sense, reason, feeling,passion, but attend! Let folly also swell the tragic chorus.Manager

　　In chief, of incident enough prepare! A show they want, they come to gapeand stare. Spin for their eyes abundant occupation, So that the multitude maywondering gaze, You by sheer bulk have won your reputation, The man youare all love to praise. By mass alone can you subdue the masses, Each thenselects in time what suits his bent. Bring much, you something bring for variousclasses, And from the house goes every one content. You give a piece,abroad in pieces send it! 'Tis a ragout - success must needs attend it; 'Tis easyto serve up, as easy to invent. A finish'd whole what boots it to present! Fullsoon the public will in pieces rend it.

　　Poet

　　How mean such handicraft as this you cannot feel! How it revolts the genuineartist's mind! The sorry trash in which these coxcombs deal, Is here approvedon principle, I find.

　　Manager

　　Such a reproof disturbs me not a whit! Who on efficient work is bent, Mustchoose the fittest instrument. Consider! 'tis soft wood you have to split; Thinktoo for whom you write, I pray! One comes to while an hour away; One fromthe festive board, a sated guest; Others, more dreaded than the rest, Fromjournal - reading hurry to the play. As to a masquerade, with absent minds,they press, Sheer curiosity their footsteps winging; Ladies display theirpersons and their dress, Actors unpaid their service bringing. What dreamsbeguile you on your poet's height? What puts a full house in a merry mood?More closely view your patrons of the night! The half are cold, the half arerude. One, the play over, craves a game of cards; Another a wild night inwanton joy would spend. Poor fools the muses' fair regards. Why court forsuch a paltry end? I tell you, give them more, still more 'tis all I ask, Thus youwill ne'er stray widely from the goal; Your audience seek to mystify cajole; Tosatisfy them - that's a harder task. What ails thee? art enraptured ordistressed?

　　Poet

　　Depart! elsewhere another servant choose What! shall the bard his godlikepower abuse? Man's loftiest right, kind nature's high bequest, For your meanpurpose basely sport away? Whence comes his mastery o'er the humanbreast, Whence o'er the elements his sway, But from the harmony that,gushing from his soul, Draws back into his heart the wondrous whole? Withcareless hand when round her spindle, Nature Winds the interminable threadof life; When 'mid the clash of Being every creature Mingles in harshinextricable strife; Who deals their course unvaried till it falleth, In rhythmicflow to music's measur'd tone? Each solitary note whose genius calleth, Toswell the mighty choir in unison? Who in the raging storm sees passionlow'ring? Or flush of earnest thought in evening's glow? Who every blossom insweet spring - time flowering Along the loved one's path would strow? Who,Nature's green familiar leaves entwining, Wreathe's glory's garland, won onevery field? Makes sure Olympus, heavenly powers combining? Man's mightyspirit, in the bard reveal'd!

　　Merryman

　　Come then, employ your lofty inspiration, And carry on the poet's avocation,Just as we carry on a love affair. Two meet by chance, are pleased, theylinger there, Insensibly are link'd, they scarce know how; Fortune seems nowpropitious, adverse now, Then come alternate rapture and despair; And 'tis atrue romance ere one's aware. Just such a drama let us now compose. Plungeboldly into life - its depths disclose! Each lives it, not to many is it known,'Twill interest wheresoever seiz'd and shown; Bright pictures, but obscuretheir meaning: A ray of truth through error gleaming, Thus you the best elixirbrew, To charm mankind, and edify them too. Then youth's fair blossomscrowd to view your play, And wait as on an oracle; while they, The tendersouls, who love the melting mood, Suck from your work their melancholyfood; Now this one, and now that, you deeply stir, Each sees the working ofhis heart laid bare. Their tears, their laughter, you command with ease, Thelofty still they honour, the illusive love. Your finish'd gentlemen you ne'er canplease; A growing mind alone will grateful prove.Poet

　　Then give me back youth's golden prime, When my own spirit too wasgrowing, When from my heart th' unbidden rhyme Gush'd forth, a fount forever flowing; Then shadowy mist the world conceal'd, And every bud sweetpromise made, Of wonders yet to be reveal'd, As through the vales, withblooms inlaid, Culling a thousand flowers I stray'd. Naught had I, yet a richprofusion! The thirst for truth, joy in each fond illusion. Give me unquell'dthose impulses to prove; Rapture so deep, its ecstasy was pain, The power ofhate, the energy of love, Give me, oh give me back my youth again!Merryman

　　Youth, my good friend, you certainly require When foes in battle round arepressing, When a fair maid, her heart on fire, Hangs on your neck with fondcaressing, When from afar, the victor's crown, To reach the hard - won goalinciteth; When from the whirling dance, to drown Your sense, the night'scarouse inviteth. But the familiar chords among Boldly to sweep, with gracefulcunning, While to its goal, the verse along Its winding path is sweetly running;This task is yours, old gentlemen, to - day; Nor are you therefore less inreverence held; Age does not make us childish, as folk say, It finds us genuinechildren e'en in eld.

　　Manager

　　A truce to words, mere empty sound, Let deeds at length appear, my friends!While idle compliments you round, You might achieve some useful ends. Whytalk of the poetic vein? Who hesitates will never know it; If bards ye are, asye maintain, Now let your inspiration show it. To you is known what werequire, Strong drink to sip is our desire; Come, brew me such without delay!To - morrow sees undone, what happens not to - day; Still forward press,nor ever tire! The possible, with steadfast trust, Resolve should be theforelock grasp; Then she will ne'er let go her clasp, And labours on, becauseshe must.

　　On German boards, you're well aware, The taste of each may have full sway;Therefore in bringing out your play, Nor scenes nor mechanism spare!Heaven's lamps employ, the greatest and the least, Be lavish of the stellarlights, Water, and fire, and rocky heights, Spare not at all, nor birds, norbeast, Thus let creation's ample sphere Forthwith in this our narrow boothappear, And with considerate speed, through fancy's spell, Journey fromheaven, thence through the world, to hell!

　　Prologue In Heaven

　　The Lord, The Heavenly Hosts. Afterwards Mephistopheles.The three Archangels come forward

　　Raphael

　　The Sun, in ancient guise, competing With brother spheres in rival song, Withthunder - march, his orb completing, Moves his predestin'd course along; Hisaspect to the powers supernal Gives strength, though fathom him none may;Transcending thought, the works eternal Are fair as on the primal day.Gabriel

　　With speed, thought baffling, unabating, Earth's splendour whirls in circlingflight; Its Eden - brightness alternating With solemn, awe - inspiring night;Ocean's broad waves in wild commotion, Against the rocks' deep base arehurled; And with the spheres, both rock and ocean Eternally are swiftlywhirled.

　　Michael

　　And tempests roar in emulation From sea to land, from land to sea, Andraging form, without cessation, A chain of wondrous agency, Full in thethunder's path careering, Flaring the swift destructions play; But, Lord, Thyservants are revering The mild procession of thy day.The Three

　　Thine aspect to the powers supernal Gives strength, though fathom thee nonemay; And all they works, sublime, eternal, Are fair as on the primal day.Mephistopheles

　　Since thou, O Lord, approachest us once more, And how it fares with us, toask art fain, Since thou hast kindly welcom'd me of yore, Thou see'st me alsonow among thy train. Excuse me, fine harangues I cannot make, Though allthe circle look on me with scorn; My pathos soon thy laughter would awake,Hadst thou the laughing mood not long forsworn. Of suns and worlds Inothing have to say, I see alone mankind's self - torturing pains. The littleworld - god still the self - same stamp retains, And is as wondrous now as onthe primal day. Better he might have fared, poor wight, Hadst thou not givenhim a gleam of heavenly light; Reason, he names it, and doth so Use it, thanbrutes more brutish still to grow. With deference to your grace, he seems tome Like any long - legged grasshopper to be, Which ever flies, and flyingsprings, And in the grass its ancient ditty sings. Would he but always in thegrass repose! In every heap of dung he thrusts his nose.The Lord

　　Hast thou naught else to say/ Is blame In coming here, as ever, thy sole aim?Does nothing on the earth to thee seem right?

　　Mephistopheles

　　No, Lord! I find things there, as ever, in sad plight. Men, in their evil days,move my compassion; Such sorry things to plague is nothing worth.The Lord

　　Know'st thou my servant, Faust?

　　Mephistopheles

　　The doctor?

　　The Lord

　　Right.

　　Mephistopheles

　　He serves thee truly in a wondrous fashion. Poor fool! His food and drink arenot of earth. An inward impulse hurries him afar, Himself half conscious of hisfrenzied mood; From heaven claimeth he the fairest star, And from the earthcraves every highest good, And all that's near, and all that's far, Fails to allaythe tumult in his blood.

　　The Lord

　　Though in perplexity he serves me now, I soon will lead him where more lightappears; When buds the sapling, doth the gardener know That flowers andfruit will deck the coming years.

　　Mephistopheles

　　What wilt thou wager? Him thou yet shall lose, If leave to me thou wilt butgive, Gently to lead him as I choose!

　　The Lord

　　So long as he on earth doth live, So long 'tis not forbidden thee. Man still musterr, while he doth strive.

　　Mephistopheles

　　I thank you; for not willingly I traffic with the dead, and still aver That youth'splump blooming cheek I very much prefer. I'm not at home to corpses; 'tis myway, Like cats with captive mice to toy and play.The Lord

　　Enough! 'tis granted thee! Divert This mortal spirit from his primal source;Him, canst thou seize, thy power exert And lead him on thy downwardcourse, Then stand abash'd, when thou perforce must own, A good man in hisdarkest aberration, Of the right path is conscious still.Mephistopheles

　　'Tis done! Full soon thou'lt see my exultation; As for my bet no fears Ientertain. And if my end I finally should gain, Excuse my triumphing with allmy soul. Dust he shall eat, ay, and with relish take, As did my cousin, therenowned snake.

　　The Lord

　　Here too thou'rt free to act without control; I ne'er have cherished hate forsuch as thee. Of all the spirits who deny, The scoffer is least wearisome tome. Ever too prone is man activity to shirk, In unconditioned rest he fainwould live; Hence this companion purposely I give, Who stirs, excites, andmust, as devil, work. But ye, the genuine sons of heaven, rejoice! In the fullliving beauty still rejoice! May that which works and lives, the ever - growing,In bonds of love enfold you, mercy - fraught, And Seeming's changeful forms,around you flowing, Do ye arrest, in ever - during thought!(Heaven closes, the Archangels disperse.)

　　Mephistopheles (alone)

　　The ancient one I like sometimes to see, And not to break with him amalways civil; 'Tis courteous in so great a lord as he, To speak so kindly evento the devil.

　　Part I

　　Dramatis Personae

　　Characters in the Prologue for the Theatre

　　The Manager.

　　The Dramatic Poet.

　　Merryman.

　　Characters in the Prologue in Heaven

　　The Lord.

　　Raphael, Gabriel, Michael, (The Heavenly Host).Mephistopheles.

　　Characters in the Tragedy

　　Faust, Mephistopheles. Wagner, a Student.

　　Margaret. Martha, Margaret's Neighbour.

　　Valentine, Margaret's Brother. Old Peasant. A Student.Elizabeth, an Acquaintance of Margaret's.

　　Frosch, Brander, Siebel, Altmayer,

　　(Guests in Auerbach's Wine Cellar.)

　　Witches; old and young; Wizards, Will - o' - the - Wisp,Witch Pedlar,

　　Protophantasmist, Servibilis, Monkeys, Spirits,Journeymen,

　　Country - folk, Citizens, Beggar, Old Fortune - teller,Shepherd, Soldier, Students, &c.

　　In the Intermezzo

　　Oberon. Titania. Ariel. Puck, &c. &c.

　　Night

　　A high vaulted narrow Gothic chamber. Faust, restless, seated at his desk.Faust

　　I have, alas! Philosophy, Medicine, Jurisprudence too, And to my costTheology, With ardent labour, studied through. And here I stand, with all mylore, Poor fool, no wiser than before. Magister, doctor styled, indeed,Already these ten years I lead, Up, down, across, and to and fro, My pupilsby the nose, - and learn, That we in truth can nothing know! That in my heartlike fire doth burn. 'Tis true I've more cunning than all your dull tribe, Magisterand doctor, priest, parson, and scribe; Scruple or doubt comes not to enthrallme, Neither can devil nor hell now appal me Hence also my heart must allpleasure forego! I may not pretend, aught rightly to know, I may not pretend,through teaching, to find A means to improve or convert mankind. Then Ihave neither goods nor treasure, No worldly honour, rank, or pleasure; Nodog in such fashion would longer live! Therefore myself to magic I give, Inhope, through spirit - voice and might, Secrets now veiled to bring to light,That I no more, with aching brow, Need speak of what I nothing know; ThatI the force may recognise That binds creation's inmost energies; Her vitalpowers, her embryo seeds survey, And fling the trade in empty words away.O full - orb'd moon, did but thy rays Their last upon mine anguish gaze!Beside this desk, at dead of night, Oft have I watched to hail thy light: Then,pensive friend! o'er book and scroll, With soothing power, thy radiance stole!In thy dear light, ah, might I climb, Freely, some mountain height sublime,Round mountain caves with spirits ride, In thy mild haze o'er meadows glide,And, purged from knowledge - fumes, renew My spirit, in thy healing dew!Woe's me! still prison'd in the gloom Of this abhorr'd and musty room! Whereheaven's dear light itself doth pass, But dimly through the painted glass!Hemmed in by volumes thick with dust, Worm - eaten, hid 'neath rust andmould, And to the high vault's topmost bound, A smoke - stained papercompassed round; With boxes round thee piled, and glass, And many auseless instrument, With old ancestral lumber blent This is thy world! a world!alas! And dost thou ask why heaves thy heart, With tighten'd pressure in thybreast? Why the dull ache will not depart, By which thy life - pulse isoppress'd? Instead of nature's living sphere, Created for mankind of old,Brute skeletons surround thee here, And dead men's bones in smoke andmould.

　　Up! Forth into the distant land! Is not this book of mystery By Nostradamus'proper hand, An all - sufficient guide? Thou'lt see The courses of the starsunroll'd; When nature doth her thoughts unfold To thee, thy soul shall rise, andseek Communion high with her to hold, As spirit doth with spirit speak! Vainby dull poring to divine The meaning of each hallow'd sign. Spirits! I feel youhov'ring near; Make answer, if my voice ye hear!(He opens the book and perceives the sign of the Macrocosmos.)Ah! at this spectacle through every sense, What sudden ecstasy of joy isflowing! I feel new rapture, hallow'd and intense, Through every nerve andvein with ardour glowing. Was it a god who character'd this scroll, The tumultin my spirit healing, O'er my sad heart with rapture stealing, And by a mysticimpulse, to my soul, The powers of nature all around revealing. Am I a God?What light intense! In these pure symbols do I see, Nature exert her vitalenergy. Now of the wise man's words I learn the sense;"Unlock'd the spirit - world doth lie, Thy sense is shut, thy heart is dead! Upscholar, lave, with courage high, Thine earthly breast in the morning - red!"(He contemplates the sign.)

　　How all things live and work, and ever blending, Weave one vast whole fromBeing's ample range! How powers celestial, rising and descending, Theirgolden buckets ceaseless interchange! Their flight on rapture - breathingpinions winging, From heaven to earth their genial influence bringing, Throughthe wild sphere their chimes melodious ringing!A wondrous show! but ah! a show alone! Where shall I grasp thee, infinitenature, where? Ye breasts, ye fountains of all life, whereon Hang heaven andearth, from which the withered heart For solace yearns, ye still impart Yoursweet and fostering tides - where are ye - where? Ye gush, and must Ilanguish in despair?

　　(He turns over the leaves of the book impatiently, and perceives the sigh ofthe Earth - spirit.)

　　How all unlike the influence of this sign! Earth - spirit, thou to me art nigher,E'en now my strength is rising higher, E'en now I glow as with new wine;Courage I feel, abroad the world to dare, The woe of earth, the bliss of earthto bear, With storms to wrestle, brave the lightning's glare, And mid thecrashing shipwreck not despair.

　　Clouds gather over me The moon conceals her light The lamp is quench'dVapours are rising - Quiv'ring round my head Flash the red beams - Downfrom the vaulted roof A shuddering horror floats, And seizes me! I feel it,spirit, prayer - compell'd, 'tis thou Art hovering near! Unveil thyself! Ha! Howmy heart is riven now! Each sense, with eager palpitation, Is strain'd to catchsome new sensation! I feel my heart surrender'd unto thee! Thou must! Thoumust! Though life should be the fee!

　　(He seizes the book, and pronounces mysteriously the sign of the spirit. Aruddy flame flashes up; the spirit appears in the flame.)Spirit

　　Who calls me?

　　Faust (turning aside) Dreadful shape! Spirit

　　With might,

　　Thou hast compelled me to appear, Long hast been sucking at my sphere,And now

　　Dr. Johann Faust: Dr. Johann Faust watching a magic disc in his study.Engraving by Rembrant.]

　　Faust

　　Woe's me! I cannot bear thy sight!

　　Spirit

　　To see me thou dost breathe thine invocation, My voice to hear, to gaze uponmy brow; Me doth thy strong entreaty bow Lo! I am here! - What coweringagitation Grasps thee, the demigod! Where's now the soul's deep cry? Whereis the breast, which in its depths a world conceiv'd And bore and cherished?which, with ecstacy, To rank itself with us, the spirits, heaved? Where artthou, Faust? whose voice I heard resound, Who towards me press'd withenergy profound? Art thou he? Thou, - who by my breath art blighted, Who,in his spirit's depths affrighted, Trembles, a crush'd and writhing worm!Faust

　　Shall I yield, thing of flame, to thee? Faust, and thine equal, I am he!Spirit

　　In the currents of life, in action's storm, I float and I wave With billowymotion! Birth and the grave A limitless ocean, A constant weaving Withchange still rife, A restless heaving, A glowing life Thus time's whirring loomunceasing I ply, And weave the life - garment of deity.Faust

　　Thou, restless spirit, dost from end to end O'ersweep the world; how near Ifeel to thee!

　　Spirit

　　Thou'rt like the spirit, thou dost comprehend, Not me!(Vanishes.)

　　Faust (deeply moved)

　　Not thee? Whom then? I, Gods own image! And not rank with thee!(A knock)

　　Oh death! I know it - 'tis my famulus My fairest fortune now escapes! That allthese visionary shapes A soulless groveller should banish thus!(Wagner in his dressing gown and night - cap, a lamp in his hand. Faust turnsround reluctantly.)

　　Wagner

　　Pardon! I heard you here declaim; A Grecian tragedy you doubtless read?Improvement in this art is now my aim, For now - a - days it much avails.Indeed An actor, oft I've heard it said, as teacher, May give instruction to apreacher.

　　Faust

　　Ay, if your priest should be an actor too, As not improbably may come topass.

　　Wagner

　　When in his study pent the whole year through, Man views the world, asthrough an optic glass, On a chance holiday, and scarcely then, How bypersuasion can he govern men?

　　Faust

　　If feeling prompt not, if it doth not flow Fresh from the spirit's depths, withstrong control Swaying to rapture every listener's soul, Idle your toil; thechase you may forego! Brood o'er your task! Together glue, Cook fromanother's feast your own ragout, Still prosecute your paltry game, And fanyour ash - heaps into flame! Thus children's wonder you'll excite, And apes', ifsuch your appetite; But that which issues from the heart alone, Will bend thehearts of others to your own.

　　Wagner

　　The speaker in delivery will find Success alone; I still am far behind.Faust

　　A worthy object still pursue! Be not a hollow tinkling fool! Soundunderstanding, judgment true, Find utterance without art or rule; And when inearnest you are moved to speak, Then is it needful cunning words to seek?Your fine harangues, so polish'd in their kind, Wherein the shreds of humanthought ye twist, Are unrefreshing as the empty wind, Whistling throughwither'd leaves and autumn mist!

　　Wagner

　　Oh God! How long is art, Our life how short! With earnest zeal Still as I plythe critic's task, I feel A strange oppression both of head and heart. The verymeans how hardly are they won, By which we to the fountains rise! Andhaply, ere one half the course is run, Check'd in his progress, the poor devildies.

　　Faust

　　Parchment, is that the sacred fount whence roll Waters, he thirsteth not whoonce hath quaffed? Oh, if it gush not from thine inmost soul, Thou has not wonthe life - restoring draught.

　　Wagner

　　Your pardon! 'tis delightful to transport Oneself into the spirit of the past, Tosee in times before us how a wise man thought, And what a glorious height wehave achieved at last.

　　Faust

　　Ay truly! even to the loftiest star! To us, my friend, the ages that are pass'd Abook with seven seals, close - fasten'd, are; And what the spirit of the timesmen call, Is merely their own spirit after all, Wherein, distorted oft, the timesare glass'd. Then truly, 'tis a sight to grieve the soul! At the first glance we fly itin dismay; A very lumber - room, a rubbish - hole; At best a sort of mock -heroic play, With saws pragmatical, and maxims sage, To suit the puppetsand their mimic stage.

　　Wagner

　　But then the world and man, his heart and brain! Touching these things all menwould something know.

　　Faust

　　Ay! what 'mong men as knowledge doth obtain! Who on the child its truename dares bestow? The few who somewhat of these things have known,Who their full hearts unguardedly reveal'd, Nor thoughts, nor feelings, fromthe mob conceal'd, Have died on crosses, or in flames been thrown. Excuseme, friend, far now the night is spent, For this time we must say adieu.Wagner

　　Still to watch on I had been well content, Thus to converse so learnedly withyou. But as to - morrow will be Easter - day, Some further questions grant, Ipray; With diligence to study still I fondly cling; Already I know much, butwould know everything.

　　(Exit.)

　　Faust Soliloquy - Chorus Of Angels

　　Faust (alone)

　　How him alone all hope abandons never, To empty trash who clings, with zealuntired, With greed for treasure gropes, and, joy - inspir'd, Exults if earth -worms second his endeavour.

　　And dare a voice of merely human birth, E'en here, where shapes immortalthrong'd intrude? Yet ah! thou poorest of the sons of earth, For once, I e'ento thee feel gratitude. Despair the power of sense did well - nigh blast, Andthou didst save me ere I sank dismay'd, So giant - like the vision seem'd, sovast, I felt myself shrink dwarf'd as I survey'd!I, God's own image, from this toil of clay Already freed, with eager joy whohail'd The mirror of eternal truth unveil'd, Mid light effulgent and celestial day:I, more than cherub, whose unfetter'd soul With penetrative glance aspir'd toflow Through nature's veins, and, still creating, know The life of gods, - howam I punish'd now! One thunder - word hath hurl'd me from the goal!Spirit! I dare not lift me to thy sphere. What though my power compell'd theeto appear, My art was powerless to detain thee here. In that great moment,rapture - fraught, I felt myself so small, so great; Fiercely didst thrust me fromthe realm of thought Back on humanity's uncertain fate! Who'll teach me now?What ought I to forego? Ought I that impulse to obey? Alas! our every deed,as well as every woe, Impedes the tenor of life's onward way!E'en to the noblest by the soul conceiv'd, Some feelings cling of baser quality;And when the goods of this world are achiev'd, Each nobler aim is termed acheat, a lie. Our aspirations, our soul's genuine life, Grow torpid in the din ofearthly strife. Though youthful phantasy, while hope inspires, Stretch o'er theinfinite her wing sublime, A narrow compass limits her desires, When wreck'dour fortunes in the gulf of time. In the deep heart of man care builds her nest,O'er secret woes she broodeth there, Sleepless she rocks herself and scarethjoy and rest; Still is she wont some new disguise to wear, She may as houseand court, as wife and child appear, As dagger, poison, fire and flood;Imagined evils chill thy blood,

　　And what thou ne'er shall lose, o'er that dost shed the tear. I am not like thegods! Feel it I must; I'm like the earth - worm, writhing in the dust, Which, ason dust it feeds, its native fare, Crushed 'neath the passer's tread, lies buriedthere.

　　Is it not dust, wherewith this lofty wall, With hundred shelves, confines meround; Rubbish, in thousand shapes, may I not call What in this moth - worlddoth my being bound? Here, what doth fail me, shall I find? Read in athousand tomes that, everywhere, Self - torture is the lot of human - kind,With but one mortal happy, here and there? Thou hollow skull, that grin, whatshould it say, But that thy brain, like mine, of old perplexed, Still yearning forthe truth, hath sought the light of day. And in the twilight wandered, sorelyvexed? Ye instruments, forsooth, ye mock at me, With wheel, and cog, andring, and cylinder; To nature's portals ye should be the key; Cunning yourwards, and yet the bolts ye fail to stir. Inscrutable in broadest light, To beunveil'd by force she doth refuse, What she reveals not to thy mental sight,Thou wilt not wrest me from her with levers and with screws. Old uselessfurnitures, yet stand ye here, Because my sire ye served, now dead and gone.Old scroll, the smoke of years dost wear, So long as o'er this desk the sorrylamp hath shone. Better my little means hath squandered quite away, Thanburden'd by that little here to sweat and groan! Wouldst thou possess thyheritage, essay, By use to render it thine own! What we employ not, butimpedes our way, That which the hour creates, that can it use alone! Butwherefore to yon spot is riveted my gaze? Is yonder flasket there a magnet tomy sight? Whence this mild radiance that around me plays, As when, 'midforest gloom, reigneth the moon's soft light?

　　Hail precious phial! Thee, with reverent awe, Down from thine old receptacleI draw! Science in thee I hail and human art. Essence of deadliest powers,refin'd and sure, Of soothing anodynes abstraction pure, Now in thy master'sneed thy grace impart! I gaze on thee, my pain is lull'd to rest; I grasp thee,calm'd the tumult in my breast; The flood - tide of my spirit ebbs away;Onward I'm summon'd o'er a boundless main, Calm at my feet expands theglassy plain, To shores unknown allures a brighter day.Lo, where a car of fire, on airy pinion, Comes floating towards me! I'mprepar'd to fly By a new track through ether's wide dominion, To distantspheres of pure activity. This life intense, this godlike ecstasy Worm that thouart such rapture canst thou earn? Only resolve with courage stern and high,Thy visage from the radiant sun to turn! Dare with determin'd will to burst theportals Past which in terror others fain would steal! Now is the time, throughdeeds, to show that mortals The calm sublimity of gods can feel; To shuddernot at yonder dark abyss, Where phantasy creates her own self - torturingbrood, Right onward to the yawning gulf to press, Around whose narrowjaws rolleth hell's fiery flood; With glad resolve to take the fatal leap, Thoughdanger threaten thee, to sink in endless sleep! Pure crystal goblet! forth Idraw thee now, From out thine antiquated case, where thou Forgotten hastreposed for many a year! Oft at my father's revels thou didst shine, To gladthe earnest guests was thine, As each to other passed the generous cheer. Thegorgeous brede of figures, quaintly wrought, Which he who quaff'd must firstin rhyme expound, Then drain the goblet at one draught profound, Hath nightsof boyhood to fond memory brought. I to my neighbour shall not reach theenow, Nor on thy rich device shall I my cunning show. Here is a juice, makesdrunk without delay; Its dark brown flood thy crystal round doth fill; Let thislast draught, the product of my skill, My own free choice, be quaff'd withresolute will, A solemn festive greeting, to the coming day!(He places the goblet to his mouth.)

　　(The ringing of bells, and choral voices.)

　　Chorus of Angels

　　Christ is arisen! Mortal, all hail to thee, Thou whom mortality, Earth's sadreality, Held as in prison.

　　Faust

　　What hum melodious, what clear silvery chime Thus draws the goblet frommy lips away? Ye deep - ton'd bells, do ye with voice sublime, Announce thesolemn dawn of Easter - day? Sweet choir! are ye the hymn of comfortsinging, Which one around the darkness of the grave, From seraph - voices,in glad triumph ringing, Of a new covenant assurance gave?Chorus of Women

　　We, his true - hearted, With spices and myrrh, Embalmed the departed, Andswathed him with care; Here we conveyed Him, Our Master, so dear; Alas!Where we laid Him, The Christ is not here,

　　Chorus of Angels

　　Christ is arisen! Blessed the loving one, Who from earth's trial throes, Healingand strengthening woes, Soars as from prison.

　　Faust

　　Wherefore, ye tones celestial, sweet and strong, Come ye a dweller in thedust to seek? Ring out your chimes believing crowds among, The messagewell I hear, my faith alone is weak; From faith her darling, miracle, hathsprung. Aloft to yonder spheres I dare not soar, Whence sound the tidings ofgreat joy; And yet, with this sweet strain familiar when a boy, Back it recallethme to life once more. Then would celestial love, with holy kiss, Come o'er mein the Sabbath's stilly hour, While, fraught with solemn meaning andmysterious power, Chim'd the deep - sounding bell, and prayer was bliss; Ayearning impulse, undefin'd yet dear, Drove me to wander on through woodand field; With heaving breast and many a burning tear, I felt with holy joy aworld reveal'd. Gay sports and festive hours proclaim'd with joyous pealing,This Easter hymn in days of old; And fond remembrance now doth me, withchildlike feeling, Back from the last, the solemn step, withhold. O still soundon, thou sweet celestial strain! The tear - drop flows, - Earth, I am thineagain!

　　Chorus of Disciples

　　He whom we mourned as dead, Living and glorious, From the dark gravehath fled, O'er death victorious; Almost creative bliss Waits on his growingpowers; Ah! Him on earth we miss; Sorrow and grief are ours. Yearning heleft his own, Mid sore annoy; Ah! we must needs bemoan. Master, thy joy!Chorus of Angels

　　Christ is arisen, Redeem'd from decay. The bonds which imprison Your souls,rend away! Praising the Lord with zeal, By deeds that love reveal, Likebrethren true and leal Sharing the daily meal, To all that sorrow feelWhisp'ring of heaven's weal, Still is the master near, Still is he here!Before The Gate

　　Promenaders of all sorts pass out.

　　Artisans

　　Why choose ye that direction, pray?

　　Others

　　To the hunting - lodge we're on our way.

　　The First

　　We towards the mill are strolling on.

　　A Mechanic

　　A walk to Wasserhof were best.

　　A Second

　　The road is not a pleasant one.

　　The Others

　　What will you do?

　　A Third

　　I'll join the rest.

　　A Fourth

　　Let's up to Burghof, there you'll find good cheer, The prettiest maidens andthe best of beer, And brawls of a prime sort.

　　A Fifth

　　You scapegrace! How; Your skin still itching for a row? Thither I will not go,I loathe the place.

　　Servant Girl

　　No, no! I to the town my steps retrace.

　　Another

　　Near yonder poplars he is sure to be.

　　The First

　　And if he is, what matters it to me! With you he'll walk, he'll dance with nonebut you, And with your pleasures what have I to do?The Second

　　To - day he will not be alone, he said His friend would be with him, the curly -head.

　　Student

　　Why how those buxom girls step on! Come, brother, we will follow themanon. Strong beer, a damsel smartly dress'd, Stinging tobacco, - these I lovethe best.

　　Burgher's Daughter

　　Look at those handsome fellows there! 'Tis really shameful, I declare, Thevery best society they shun, After those servant girls forsooth, to run.Second Student (to the first)

　　Not quite so fast! for in our rear, Two girls, well - dress'd, are drawing near;Not far from us the one doth dwell, And sooth to say, I like her well. Theywalk demurely, yet you'll see, That they will let us join them presently.The First

　　Not I! restraints of all kinds I detest. Quick! let us catch the wild - game ere itflies, The hand on Saturday the mop that plies, Will on the Sunday fondle youthe best.

　　Burgher

　　No, this new Burgomaster, I like him not, God knows, Now, he's in office,daily more arrogant he grows; And for the town, what doth he do for it? Arenot things worse from day to day? To more restraints we must submit; Andtaxes more than ever pay.

　　Beggar (sings)

　　Kind gentleman and ladies fair, So rosy - cheek'd and trimly dress'd, Bepleas'd to listen to my prayer, Relieve and pity the distress'd. Let me notvainly sing my lay! His heart's most glad whose hand is free. Now when allmen keep holiday, Should be a harvest - day to me.Another Burgher

　　On holidays and Sundays naught know I more inviting Than chatting aboutwar and war's alarms, When folk in Turkey, up in arms, Far off, are 'gainsteach other fighting. We at the window stand, our glasses drain, And watchadown the stream the painted vessels gliding Then joyful we at eve comehome again, And peaceful times we bless, peace long - abiding.Third Burgher

　　Ay, neighbour! So let matters stand for me! There they may scatter oneanother's brains, And wild confusion round them see So here at home in quietall remains! Old Woman (to the Burghers' Daughters) Heyday! How smart!The fresh young blood! Who would not fall in love with you? Not quite soproud! 'Tis well and good! And what you wish, that I could help you to.Burgher's Daughter

　　Come, Agatha! I care not to be seen Walking in public with these witches.True, My future lover, last St. Andrew's E'en, In flesh and blood she broughtbefore my view.

　　Another

　　And mine she show'd me also in the glass, A soldier's figure, with companionsbold; I look around, I seek him as I pass, In vain, his form I nowhere canbehold.

　　Soldiers

　　Fortress with turrets And walls high in air, Damsel disdainful, Haughty andfair, There be my prey! Bold is the venture, Costly the pay!Hark how the trumpet Thither doth call us, Where either pleasure Or deathmay befall us. Hail to the tumult! Life's in the field! Damsel and fortress To usmust yield.

　　Bold is the venture, Costly the pay! Gaily the soldier Marches away.Faust and Wagner - Peasant Dances

　　Faust

　　Loosed from their fetters are streams and rills Through the gracious spring -tide's all - quickening glow; Hope's budding joy in the vale doth blow; OldWinter back to the savage hills Withdraweth his force, decrepid now. Thenceonly impotent icy grains Scatters he as he wings his flight, Striping with sleetthe verdant plains; But the sun endureth no trace of white; Everywhere growthand movement are rife, All things investing with hues of life: Though flowersare lacking, varied of dye, Their colours the motley throng supply. Turn theearound, and from this height, Back to the town direct thy sight. Forth from thehollow, gloomy gate, Stream forth the masses, in bright array. Gladly seekthey the sun to - day; The Lord's Resurrection they celebrate: For theythemselves have risen, with joy, From tenement sordid, from cheerless room,From bonds of toil, from care and annoy, From gable and roof's o'er -hanging gloom, From crowded alley and narrow street, And from thechurches' awe - breathing night, All now have come forth into the light. Look,only look, on nimble feet, Through garden and field how spread the throng,How o'er the river's ample sheet,

　　Many a gay wherry glides along; And see, deep sinking in the tide, Pushes thelast boat now away. E'en from yon far hill's path - worn side, Flash the brighthues of garments gay. Hark! Sounds of village mirth arise; This is the people'sparadise. Both great and small send up a cheer; Here am I man, I feel it here.Wagner

　　Sir Doctor, in a walk with you There's honour and instruction too; Yet herealone I care not to resort, Because I coarseness hate of every sort. Thisfiddling, shouting, skittling, I detest; I hate the tumult of the vulgar throng; Theyroar as by the evil one possess'd, And call it pleasure, call it song.Peasants (under the linden - tree)

　　Dance and song

　　The shepherd for the dance was dress'd, With ribbon, wreath, and colouredvest, A gallant show displaying. And round about the linden - tree, Theyfooted it right merrily. Juchhe! Juchhe! Juchheisa! Heisa! He! So fiddle - bowwas braying

　　Our swain amidst the circle press'd, He push'd a maiden trimly dress'd, Andjogg'd her with his elbow; The buxom damsel turn'd her head, "Now that's astupid trick!" she said Juchhe! Juchhe! Juchheisa! Heisa! He! Don't be sorude, good fellow!

　　Swift in the circle they advanced, They danced to right, to left they danced,And all the skirts were swinging. And they grew red, and they grew warm,Panting, they rested arm in arm, Juchhe! Juchhe! Juchheisa! Heisa! He! Tohip their elbow bringing.

　　Don't make so free! How many a maid Has been betroth'd and then betray'd;And has repented after! Yet still he flatter'd her aside, And from the linden, farand wide, Juchhe! Juchhe! Juchheisa! Heisa! He! Rang fiddle - bow andlaughter.

　　Old Peasant

　　Doctor, 'tis really kind of you, To condescend to come this way, A highlylearned man like you, To join our mirthful throng to - day. Our fairest cup Ioffer you, which we with sparkling drink have crown'd, And pledging you, Ipray aloud, That every drop within its round, While it your present thirstallays, May swell the number of your days.

　　Faust

　　I take the cup you kindly reach, Thanks and prosperity to each! (The crowdgather round in a circle.)

　　Old Peasant

　　Ay, truly! 'tis well done, that you Our festive meeting thus attend; You, who inevil days of yore, So often show'd yourself our friend! Full many a one standsliving here, Who from the fever's deadly blast, Your father rescu'd, when hisskill The fatal sickness stay'd at last. A young man then, each house yousought, Where reign'd the mortal pestilence. Corpse after corpse was carriedforth, But still unscath'd you issued thence. Sore then your trials and severe;The Helper yonder aids the helper here.

　　All

　　Heaven bless the trusty friend, and long To help the poor his life prolong!Faust

　　To Him above in homage bend, Who prompts the helper and Who help dothsend. (He proceeds with Wagner.)

　　Wagner

　　What feelings, great man, must thy breast inspire, At homage paid thee by thiscrowd! Thrice blest Who from the gifts by him possessed Such benefit candraw! The sire Thee to his boy with reverence shows; They press around,inquire, advance, Hush'd is the fiddle, check'd the dance. Where thou dostpass they stand in rows, And each aloft his bonnet throws, But little fails andthey to thee, As though the Host came by, would bend the knee.Faust

　　A few steps further, up to yonder stone! Here rest we from our walk. In timeslong past, Absorb'd in thought, here oft I sat alone, And disciplin'd myselfwith prayer and fast. Then rich in hope, with faith sincere, With sighs, andhands in anguish press'd, The end of that sore plague, with many a tear, Fromheaven's dread Lord, I sought to wrest. The crowd's applause assumes ascornful tone. Oh, could'st thou in my inner being read, How little either sireor son, Of such renown deserves the meed! My sire, of good repute, andsombre mood, O'er nature's powers and every mystic zone, With honest zeal,but methods of his own, With toil fantastic loved to brood; His time in darkalchemic cell, With brother adepts he would spend, And there antagonistscompel, Through numberless receipts to blend. A ruddy lion there, a suitorbold, In tepid bath was with the lily wed. Thence both, while open flamesaround them roll'd, Were tortur'd to another bridal bed. Was then the youthfulqueen descried With varied colours in the flask; This was our medicine; thepatients died, "Who were restored?" none cared to ask. With our infernalmixture thus, ere long, These hills and peaceful vales among, We rag'd morefiercely than the pest; Myself the deadly poison did to thousands give; Theypined away, I yet must live, To hear the reckless murderers blest.Wagner

　　Why let this thought your soul o'ercast? Can man do more than with nice skill,With firm and conscientious will, Practise the art transmitted from the past? Ifthou thy sire dost honour in thy youth, His lore thou gladly wilt receive; Inmanhood, dost thou spread the bounds of truth, Then may thy son a highergoal achieve.

　　Faust

　　How blest, in whom the fond desire From error's sea to rise, hope stillrenews! What a man knows not, that he doth require, And what he knoweth,that he cannot use. But let not moody thoughts their shadow throw O'er thecalm beauty of this hour serene! In the rich sunset see how brightly glow Yoncottage homes, girt round with verdant green! Slow sinks the orb, the day innow no more; Yonder he hastens to diffuse new life. Oh for a pinion from theearth to soar, And after, ever after him to strive! Then should I see the worldbelow, Bathed in the deathless evening - beams, The vales reposing, everyheight a - glow, The silver brooklets meeting golden streams. The savagemountain, with its cavern'd side, Bars not my godlike progress. Lo, the ocean,Its warm bays heaving with a tranquil motion, To my rapt vision opes itsample tide! But now at length the god appears to sink; A new - born impulsewings my flight, Onward I press, his quenchless light to drink, The day beforeme, and behind the night, The pathless waves beneath, and over me the skies.Fair dream, it vanish'd with the parting day! Alas! that when on spirit - wingwe rise, No wing material lifts our mortal clay. But 'tis our inborn impulse,deep and strong, Upwards and onwards still to urge our flight, When farabove us pours its thrilling song The sky - lark, lost in azure light, When onextended wing amain O'er pine - crown'd height the eagle soars, And overmoor and lake, the crane Still striveth towards its native shores.Wagner

　　To strange conceits oft I myself must own, But impulse such as this I ne'erhave known: Nor woods, nor fields, can long our thoughts engage, Theirwings I envy not the feather'd kind; Far otherwise the pleasures of the mind,Bear us from book to book, from page to page! Then winter nights growcheerful; keen delight Warms every limb; and ah! when we unroll Some oldand precious parchment, at the sight All heaven itself descends upon the soul.Faust

　　Thy heart by one sole impulse is possess'd; Unconscious of the other stillremain! Two souls, alas! are lodg'd within my breast, Which struggle there forundivided reign: One to the world, with obstinate desire, And closely -cleaving organs, still adheres; Above the mist, the other doth aspire, Withsacred vehemence, to purer spheres. Oh, are there spirits in the air, Who float'twixt heaven and earth dominion wielding, Stoop hither from your goldenatmosphere, Lead me to scenes, new life and fuller yielding! A magic mantledid I but possess, Abroad to waft me as on viewless wings, I'd prize it farbeyond the costliest dress, Nor would I change it for the robe of kings.Alas, two souls are living in my breast, And one wants to separate itself fromthe other. One holds fast to the world with earthy passion And clings withtwining tendrils: The other lifts itself with forceful craving To the very roof ofheaven.

　　Wagner

　　Call not the spirits who on mischief wait! Their troop familiar, streamingthrough the air, From every quarter threaten man's estate, And danger in athousand forms prepare! They drive impetuous from the frozen north, Withfangs sharp - piercing, and keen arrowy tongues; From the ungenial east theyissue forth, And prey, with parching breath, upon thy lungs; If, waft'd on thedesert's flaming wing, They from the south heap fire upon the brain,Refreshment from the west at first they bring, Anon to drown thyself and fieldand plain. In wait for mischief, they are prompt to hear; With guileful purposeour behests obey; Like ministers of grace they oft appear, And lisp likeangels, to betray. But let us hence! Grey eve doth all things blend, The airgrows chill, the mists descend! 'Tis in the evening first our home we prize Whystand you thus, and gaze with wondering eyes? What in the gloom thus movesyou?

　　Faust

　　Yon black hound See'st thou, through corn and stubble scampering round?Wagner

　　I've mark'd him long, naught strange in him I see!Faust

　　Note him! What takest thou the brute to be?

　　Wagner

　　But for a poodle, whom his instinct serves His master's track to find oncemore.

　　Faust

　　Dost mark how round us, with wide spiral curves, He wheels, each circlecloser than before? And, if I err not, he appears to me A line of fire upon histrack to leave.

　　Wagner

　　Naught but a poodle black of hue I see; 'Tis some illusion doth your sightdeceive.

　　Faust

　　Methinks a magic coil our feet around, He for a future snare doth lightlyspread.

　　Wagner

　　Around us as in doubt I see him shyly bound, Since he two strangers seeth inhis master's stead.

　　Faust

　　The circle narrows, he's already near!

　　Wagner

　　A dog dost see, no spectre have we here; He growls, doubts, lays him on hisbelly, too, And wags his tail - as dogs are wont to do.Faust

　　Come hither, Sirrah! join our company!

　　Wagner

　　A very poodle, he appears to be! Thou standest still, for thee he'll wait; Thouspeak'st to him, he fawns upon thee straight; Aught thou mayst lose, again he'llbring, And for thy stick will into water spring.Faust

　　Thou'rt right indeed; no traces now I see Whatever of a spirit's agency. 'Tistraining - nothing more.

　　Wagner

　　A dog well taught E'en by the wisest of us may be sought. Ay, to your favourhe's entitled too, Apt scholar of the students, 'tis his due! (They enter the gateof the town.)

　　Faust Meets With Mephistopheles

　　Study

　　Faust (entering with the poodle)

　　Now field and meadow I've forsaken; O'er them deep night her veil dothdraw; In us the better soul doth waken, With feelings of foreboding awe, Alllawless promptings, deeds unholy, Now slumber, and all wild desires; Thelove of man doth sway us wholly, And love to God the soul inspires.Peace, poodle, peace! Scamper not thus; obey me! Why at the thresholdsnuffest thou so? Behind the stove now quietly lay thee, My softest cushion tothee I'll throw. As thou, without, didst please and amuse me Running andfrisking about on the hill, So tendance now I will not refuse thee; A welcomeguest, if thou'lt be still.

　　Ah! when the friendly taper gloweth, Once more within our narrow cell, Thenin the heart itself that knoweth, A light the darkness doth dispel. Reason hervoice resumes; returneth Hope's gracious bloom, with promise rife; Forstreams of life the spirit yearneth, Ah! for the very fount of life.Poodle, snarl not! with the tone that arises, Hallow'd and peaceful, my soulwithin, Accords not thy growl, thy bestial din. We find it not strange, that mandespises What he conceives not; That he the good and fair misprizes Findingthem often beyond his ken; Will the dog snarl at them like men?But ah! Despite my will, it stands confessed, Contentment welleth up nolonger in my breast. Yet wherefore must the stream, alas, so soon be dry,That we once more athirst should lie? Full oft this sad experience hath beenmine; Nathless the want admits of compensation; For things above the earthwe learn to pine, Our spirits yearn for revelation, Which nowhere burns withpurer beauty blent, Than here in the New Testament. To ope the ancient textan impulse strong Impels me, and its sacred lore, With honest purpose toexplore, And render into my love German tongue.(He opens a volume, and applies himself to it.)'Tis writ, "In the beginning was the Word!" I pause, perplex'd! Who now willhelp afford? I cannot the mere Word so highly prize; I must translate itotherwise, If by the spirit guided as I read. "In the beginning was the Sense!"Take heed, The import of this primal sentence weigh, Lest thy too hasty penbe led astray! Is force creative then of Sense the dower? "In the beginningwas the Power!" Thus should it stand: yet, while the line I trace, A somethingwarns me, once more to efface. The spirit aids! from anxious scruples freed, Iwrite, "In the beginning was the Deed!"

　　Am I with thee my room to share, Poodle, thy barking now forbear, Forbearthy howling! Comrade so noisy, ever growling, I cannot suffer here to dwell.One or the other, mark me well, Forthwith must leave the cell. I'm loath theguest - right to withhold; The door's ajar, the passage clear; But what mustnow mine eyes behold! Are nature's laws suspended here? Real is it, or aphantom show? In length and breadth how doth my poodle grow! He liftshimself with threat'ning mien, In likeness of a dog no longer seen! Whatspectre have I harbour'd thus! Huge as a hippopotamus, With fiery eye,terrific tooth! Ah! now I know thee, sure enough! For such a base, half -hellish brood, The key of Solomon is good.

　　Spirits (without)

　　Captur'd there within is one! Stay without and follow none! Like a fox in ironsnare, Hell's old lynx is quaking there,

　　But take heed! Hover round, above, below,

　　To and fro, Then from durance is he freed! Can ye aid him, spirits all, Leavehim not in mortal thrall! Many a time and oft hath he Served us, when atliberty.

　　Faust

　　The monster to confront, at first, The spell of Four must be rehears'd;Salamander shall kindle, Writhe nymph of the wave, In air sylph shall dwindle,And Kobold shall slave.

　　Who doth ignore The primal Four, Nor knows aright Their use and might,O'er spirits will he Ne'er master be!

　　Vanish in the fiery glow, Salamander! Rushingly together flow. Undine!Shimmer in the meteor's gleam, Sylphide! Hither bring thine homely aid,Incubus! Incubus! Step forth! I do adjure thee thus! None of the Four Lurksin the beast: He grins at me, untroubled as before; I have not hurt him in theleast. A spell of fear Thou now shalt hear. Art thou, comrade fell, Fugitivefrom Hell? See then this sign, Before which incline The murky troops of Hell!With bristling hair now doth the creature swell.Canst thou, reprobate, Read the uncreate, Unspeakable, diffused Throughoutthe heavenly sphere, Shamefully abused, Transpierced with nail and spear!Behind the stove, tam'd by my spells, Like an elephant he swells; Wholly nowhe fills the room, He into mist will melt away. Ascend not to the ceiling!Come, Thyself at the master's feet now lay! Thou seest that mine is no idlethreat. With holy fire I will scorch thee yet! Wait not the might That lies in thetriple - glowing light! Wait not the might Of all my arts in fullest measure!Mephistopheles

　　(As the mist sinks, comes forward from behind the stove, in the dress of atravelling scholar) Why all this uproar? What's the master's pleasure?Faust

　　This then the kernel of the brute! A traveling scholar? Why I needs mustsmile.

　　Mephistopheles

　　Your learned reverence humbly I salute! You've made me swelter in a prettystyle.

　　Faust

　　Thy name?

　　Mephistopheles

　　The question trifling seems from one, Who it appears the Word doth rate solow; Who, undeluded by mere outward show, To Being's depths wouldpenetrate alone.

　　Faust

　　With gentlemen like you indeed The inward essence from the name we read,As all too plainly it doth appear, When Beelzebub, Destroyer, Liar, meets theear. Who then art thou?

　　Mephistopheles

　　Part of that power which still Produceth good, whilst ever scheming ill.Faust

　　What hidden mystery in this riddle lies?

　　Mephistopheles

　　The spirit I, which evermore denies! And justly; for whate'er to light is broughtDeserves again to be reduced to naught; Then better 'twere that naught shouldbe. Thus all the elements which ye Destruction, Sin, or briefly, Evil, name, Asmy peculiar element I claim.

　　Faust

　　Thou nam'st thyself a part, and yet a whole I see.Mephistopheles

　　The modest truth I speak to thee. Though folly's microcosm, man, it seems,Himself to be a perfect whole esteems: Part of the part am I, which at the firstwas all, A part of darkness, which gave birth to light, Proud light, who nowhis mother would enthrall, Contesting space and ancient rank with night. Yethe succeedeth not, for struggle as he will, To forms material he adhereth still;From them he streameth, them he maketh fair, And still the progress of hisbeams they check; And so, I trust, when comes the final wreck, Light will, erelong, the doom of matter share.

　　Faust

　　Thy worthy avocation now I guess! Wholesale annihilation won't prevail, Sothou'rt beginning on a smaller scale.

　　Mephistopheles

　　And, to say truth, as yet with small success. Oppos'd to naught, this clumsyworld, The something - it subsisteth still; Not yet is it to ruin hurl'd, Despitethe efforts of my will. Tempests and earthquakes, fire and flood, I've tried;Yet land and ocean still unchang'd abide! And then of humankind and beasts,the accursed brood, Neither o'er them can I extend my sway. What countlessmyriads have I swept away! Yet ever circulates the fresh young blood. It isenough to drive me to despair! As in the earth, in water, and in air, Athousand germs burst forth spontaneously; In moisture, drought, heat, cold,they still appear! Had I not flame selected as my sphere Nothing apart hadbeen reversed for me.

　　Faust

　　So thou with thy cold devil's fist Still clench'd in malice impotent Dost thecreative power resist, The active, the beneficent! Henceforth some other taskessay, Of Chaos thou the wondrous son!

　　Mephistopheles

　　We will consider what you say, And talk about it more anon! For this timehave I leave to go?

　　Faust

　　Why thou shouldst ask, I cannot see. Since thee I now have learned to know,At thy good pleasure, visit me. Here is the window, here the door, Thechimney, too, may serve thy need.

　　Mephistopheles

　　I must confess, my stepping o'er Thy threshold a slight hindrance dothimpede; The wizard - foot doth me retain.

　　Faust

　　The pentagram thy peace doth mar? To me, thou son of hell, explain, Howcamest thou in, if this thine exit bar? Could such a spirit aught ensnare?Mephistopheles

　　Observe it well, it is not drawn with care, One of the angles, that which pointswithout, Is, as thou seest, not quite closed.

　　Faust

　　Chance hath the matter happily dispos'd! So thou my captive art? No doubt!By accident thou thus art caught!

　　Mephistopheles

　　In sprang the dog, indeed, observing naught; Things now assume anothershape, The devil's in the house and can't escape.Faust

　　Why through the window not withdraw?

　　Mephistopheles

　　For ghosts and for the devil 'tis a law. Where they stole in, there they mustforth. We're free The first to choose; as to the second, slaves are we.Faust

　　E'en hell hath its peculiar laws, I see! I'm glad of that! a pact may then bemade, The which you gentlemen will surely keep?Mephistopheles

　　What e'er therein is promised thou shalt reap, No tittle shall remain unpaid.But such arrangements time require; We'll speak of them when next we meet;Most earnestly I now entreat, This once permission to retire.Faust

　　Another moment prithee here remain, Me with some happy word to pleasure.Mephistopheles

　　Now let me go! ere long I'll come again, Then thou may'st question at thyleisure.

　　Faust

　　'Twas not my purpose thee to lime; The snare hast entered of thine own freewill: Let him who holds the devil, hold him still! So soon he'll catch him not asecond time.

　　Mephistopheles

　　If it so please thee, I'm at thy command; Only on this condition, understand;That worthily thy leisure to beguile, I here may exercise my arts awhile.Faust

　　Thou'rt free to do so! Gladly I'll attend; But be thine art a pleasant one!Mephistopheles

　　My friend,

　　This hour enjoyment more intense, Shall captivate each ravish'd sense, Thanthou could'st compass in the bound Of the whole year's unvarying round; Andwhat the dainty spirits sing, The lovely images they bring. Are no fantasticsorcery. Rich odours shall regale your smell, On choicest sweets your palatedwell, Your feelings thrill with ecstasy. No preparation do we need, Here wetogether are. Proceed.

　　Spirits

　　Hence overshadowing gloom, Vanish from sight! O'er us thine azure dome,Bend, beauteous light! Dark clouds that o'er us spread, Melt in thin air! Stars,your soft radiance shed, Tender and fair. Girt with celestial might, Wingingtheir airy flight, Spirits are thronging. Follows their forms of light Infinitelonging! Flutter their vestures bright O'er field and grove! Where in their leafybower Lovers the livelong hour Vow deathless love. Soft bloometh bud andbower! Bloometh the grove! Grapes from the spreading vine Crown the fullmeasure; Fountains of foaming wine Gush from the pressure. Still where thecurrents wind, Gems brightly gleam. Leaving the hills behind On rolls thestream; Now into ample seas, Spreadeth the flood; Laving the sunny leas,Mantled with wood. Rapture the feather'd throng, Gaily careering, Sip as theyfloat along; Sunward they're steering; On towards the isles of light Wingingtheir way, That on the waters bright Dancingly play. Hark to the choral strain,Joyfully ringing! While on the grassy plain Dancers are springing; Climbing thesteep hill's side, Skimming the glassy tide, Wander they there; Others onpinions wide Wing the blue air; All lifeward tending, upward still wending,Towards yonder stars that gleam, Far, far above; Stars from whose tenderbeam Rains blissful love.

　　Mephistopheles

　　Well done, my dainty spirits! now he slumbers! Ye have entranc'd him fairlywith your numbers! This minstrelsy of yours I must repay, Thou art not yet theman to hold the devil fast! With fairest shapes your spells around him cast,And plunge him in a sea of dreams! But that this charm be rent, the thresholdpassed, Tooth of rat the way must clear. I need not conjure long it seems,One rustles hitherward, and soon my voice will hear. The master of the ratsand mice, Of flies and frogs, of bugs and lice, Commands thy presence;without fear Come forth and gnaw the threshold here, Where he with oil hassmear'd it. - Thou Com'st hopping forth already! Now To work! The pointthat holds me bound Is in the outer angle found. Another bite - so - now 'tisdoneNow, Faustus, till we meet again, dream on.Faust (awaking)

　　Am I once more deluded! must I deem That thus the throng of spiritsdisappear? The devil's presence, was it but a dream? Hath but a poodlescap'd and left me here?

　　Faust And Mephistopheles - A Student

　　Study

　　Faust

　　A knock? Come in! Who now would break my rest?Mephistopheles

　　'Tis I!

　　Faust

　　Come in!

　　Mephistopheles

　　Thrice be the words express'd.

　　Faust

　　Then I repeat, Come in! Mephistopheles

　　'Tis well, I hope that we shall soon agree! For now your fancies to expel,Here, as a youth of high degree, I come in gold - lac'd scarlet vest, And stiff -silk mantle richly dress'd, A cock's gay feather for a plume, A long andpointed rapier, too; And briefly I would counsel you To don at once the samecostume, And, free from trammels, speed away, That what life is you mayessay.

　　Faust

　　In every garb I needs must feel oppress'd, My heart to earth's low cares aprey. Too old the trifler's part to play, Too young to live by no desirepossess'd. What can the world to me afford? Renounce! renouce! is still theword; This is the everlasting song In every ear that ceaseless rings, Andwhich, alas, our whole life long, Hoarsely each passing moment sings. But tonew horror I awake each morn, And I could weep hot tears, to see the sunDawn on another day, whose round forlorn Accomplishes no wish of mine -not one. Which still, with froward captiousness, impains E'en the presentimentof every joy, While low realities and paltry cares The spirit's fond imaginingsdestroy. Then must I too, when falls the veil of night, Stretch'd on my palletlanguish in despair, Appalling dreams my soul affright; No rest vouchsafed meeven there. The god, who throned within my breast resides, Deep in my soulcan stir the springs; With sovereign sway my energies he guides, He cannotmove external things; And so existence is to me a weight. Death fondly Idesire, and life I hate.

　　Mephistopheles

　　And yet, methinks, by most 'twill be confess'd That Death is never quite awelcome guest.

　　Faust

　　Happy the man around whose brow he binds The bloodstain'd wreath inconquest's dazzling hour; Or whom, excited by the dance, he finds Dissolv'din bliss, in love's delicious bower! O that before the lofty spirit's might,Enraptured, I had rendered up my soul!

　　Mephistopheles

　　Yet did a certain man refrain one night, Of its brown juice to drain the crystalbowl.

　　Faust

　　To play the spy diverts you then?

　　Mephistopheles

　　I own, Though not omniscient, much to me is known.Faust

　　If o'er my soul the tone familiar, stealing, Drew me from harrowing thought'sbewild'ring maze, Touching the ling'ring chords of childlike feeling, With sweetharmonies of happier days: So curse I all, around the soul that windeth Itsmagic and alluring spell, And with delusive flattery bindeth Its victim to thisdreary cell! Curs'd before all things be the high opinion, Wherewith the spiritgirds itself around! Of shows delusive curs'd be the dominion, Within whosemocking sphere our sense is bound! Accurs'd of dreams the treacherouswiles, The cheat of glory, deathless fame! Accurs'd what each as propertybeguiles, Wife, child, slave, plough, whate'er its name! Accurs'd be mammon,when with treasure He doth to daring deeds incite: Or when to steep the soulin pleasure, He spreads the couch of soft delight! Curs'd be the grape'sbalsamic juice! Accurs'd love's dream, of joys the first! Accurs'd be hope!accurs'd be faith! And more than all, be patience curs'd!Chorus of Spirits (invisible)

　　Woe! Woe! Thou hast destroy'd The beautiful world With violent blow; 'Tisshiver'd! 'tis shatter'd! The fragments abroad by a demigod scatter'd! Nowwe sweep The wrecks into nothingness! Fondly we weep The beauty that'sgone! Thou, 'mongst the sons of earth, Lofty and mighty one, Build it oncemore! In thine own bosom the lost world restore! Now with unclouded senseEnter a new career; Songs shall salute thine ear, Ne'er heard before!Mephistopheles

　　My little ones these spirits be. Hark! with shrewd intelligence, How theyrecommend to thee Action, and the joys of sense! In the busy world to dwell,Fain they would allure thee hence: For within this lonely cell, Stagnate sap oflife and sense.

　　Forbear to trifle longer with thy grief, Which, vulture - like, consumes thee inthis den. The worst society is some relief, Making thee feel thyself a man withmen. Nathless, it is not meant, I trow, To thrust thee 'mid the vulgar throng. Ito the upper ranks do not belong; Yet if, by me companion'd, thou Thy stepsthrough life forthwith wilt take, Upon the spot myself I'll make Thy comrade;Should it suit thy need, I am thy servant, am thy slave indeed!Faust

　　And how must I thy services repay?

　　Mephistopheles

　　Thereto thou lengthen'd repite hast!

　　Faust

　　No! No! The devil is an egoist I know: And, for Heaven's sake, 'tis not hisway Kindness to any one to show. Let the condition plainly be exprest! Sucha domestic is a dangerous guest.

　　Mephistopheles

　　I'll pledge myself to be thy servant here, Still at thy back alert and prompt tobe; But when together yonder we appear, Then shalt thou do the same forme.

　　Faust

　　But small concern I feel for yonder world; Hast thou this system into ruinhurl'd, Another may arise the void to fill. This earth the fountain whence mypleasures flow, This sun doth daily shine upon my woe, And if this world Imust forego, Let happen then, - what can and will. I to this theme will closemine ears, If men hereafter hate and love, And if there be in yonder spheres Adepth below or height above.

　　Mephistopheles

　　In this mood thou mayst venture it. But make The compact! I at once willundertake To charm thee with mine arts. I'll give thee more Than mortal eyehath e'er beheld before.

　　Faust

　　What, sorry Devil, hast thou to bestow? Was ever mortal spirit, in its highendeavour, Fathom'd by Being such as thou? Yet food thou hast whichsatisfieth never, Hast ruddy gold, that still doth flow Like restless quicksilveraway, A game thou hast, at which none win who play, A girl who would, withamorous eyen, E'en from my breast, a neighbour snare, Lofty ambition's joydivine, That, meteor - like, dissolves in air. Show me the fruit that, ere 'tispluck'd, doth rot, And trees, whose verdure daily buds anew!Mephistopheles

　　Such a commission scares me not, I can provide such treasures, it is true; But,my good friend, a season will come round, When on what's good we mayregale in peace.

　　Faust

　　If e'er upon my couch, stretched at my ease, I'm found, Then may my life thatinstant cease! Me canst thou cheat with glozing wile Till self - reproach away Icast, Me with joy's lure canst thou beguile; Let that day be for me the last! Bethis our wager!

　　Mephistopheles

　　Settled!

　　Faust

　　Sure and fast! When to the moment I shall say, "Linger awhile! so fair thouart!" Then mayst thou fetter me straightway, Then to the abyss will I depart!Then may the solemn death - bell sound, Then from thy service thou art free,The index then may cease its round. And time be never more for me!Mephistopheles

　　I shall remember: pause, ere 'tis too late.

　　Faust

　　Thereto a perfect right hast thou. My strength I do not rashly overrate. Slaveam I here, at any rate, If thine, or whose, it matters not, I trow.Mephistopheles

　　At thine inaugural feast I will this day Attend, my duties to commence. Butone thing! - Accidents may happen, hence A line or two in writing grant, Ipray.

　　Faust

　　A writing, Pedant! dost demand from me? Man, and man's plighted word, arethese unknown to thee? Is't not enough, that by the word I gave, My doomfor evermore is cast? Doth not the world in all its currents rave, And must apromise hold me fast? Yet fixed is this delusion in our heart; Who, of his ownfree will, therefrom would part? How blest within whose breast truth reignethpure! No sacrifice will he repent when made! A formal deed, with seal andsignature, A spectre this from which all shrink afraid. The word its liferesigneth in the pen, Leather and wax usurp the mastery then. Spirits of evil!what dost thou require? Brass, marble, parchment, paper, dost desire? Shall Iwith chisel, pen, or graver write? Thy choice is free; to me 'tis all the same.Mephistopheles

　　Wherefore thy passion so excite And thus thine eloquence inflame? A scrap isfor our compact good. Thou under - signest merely with a drop of blood.Faust

　　If this will satisfy thy mind, Thy whim I'll gratify, howe'er absurd.Mephistopheles

　　Blood is a juice of very special kind.

　　Faust

　　Be not afraid that I shall break my word! The scope of all my energy Is inexact accordance with my vow. Vainly I have aspired too high; I'm on a levelbut with such as thou; Me the great spirit scorn'd, defied; Nature from meherself doth hide; Rent is the web of thought; my mind Doth knowledge loatheof every kind. In depths of sensual pleasure drown'd, Let us our fiery passionsstill! Enwrapp'd in magic's veil profound, Let wondrous charms our sensesthrill! Plunge we in time's tempestuous flow, Stem we the rolling surge ofchance! There may alternate weal and woe, Success and failure, as they can,Mingle and shift in changeful dance! Excitement is the sphere for man.Mephistopheles

　　Nor goal, nor measure is prescrib'd to you, If you desire to taste of everything, To snatch at joy while on the wing, May your career amuse and profittoo! Only fall to and don't be over coy!

　　Faust

　　Hearken! The end I aim at is not joy; I crave excitement, agonizing bliss,Enamour'd hatred, quickening vexation. Purg'd from the love of knowledge,my vocation, The scope of all my powers henceforth be this, To bare mybreast to every pang, - to know In my heart's core all human weal and woe,To grasp in thought the lofty and the deep, Men's various fortunes on mybreast to heap, And thus to theirs dilate my individual mind, And share atlength with them the shipwreck of mankind.

　　Mephistopheles

　　Oh, credit me, who still as ages roll, Have chew'd this bitter fare from year toyear, No mortal, from the cradle to the bier, Digests the ancient leaven!Know, this Whole Doth for the Deity alone subsist! He in eternal brightnessdoth exist, Us unto darkness he hath brought, and here Where day and nightalternate, is your sphere.

　　Faust

　　But 'tis my will!

　　Mephistopheles

　　Well spoken, I admit! But one thing puzzles me, my friend; Time's short, artlong; methinks 'twere fit That you to friendly counsel should attend. A poetchoose as your ally! Let him thought's wide dominion sweep, Each good andnoble quality, Upon your honoured brow to heap; The lion's magnanimity,The fleetness of the hind, The fiery blood of Italy, The Northern's steadfastmind. Let him to you the mystery show To blend high aims and cunning low;And while youth's passions are aflame To fall in love by rule and plan! I fainwould meet with such a man; Would him Sir Microcosmus name.Faust

　　What then am I, if I aspire in vain The crown of our humanity to gain,Towards which my every sense doth strain?

　　Mephistopheles

　　Thou'rt after all - just what thou art. Put on thy head a wig with countlesslocks, And to a cubit's height upraise thy socks, Still thou remainest ever,what thou art.

　　Faust

　　I fell it, I have heap'd upon my brain The gather'd treasure of man's thought invain; And when at length from studious toil I rest, No power, new - born,springs up within my breast; A hair's breadth is not added to my height, I amno nearer to the infinite.

　　Mephistopheles

　　Good sir, these things you view indeed, Just as by other men they're view'd;We must more cleverly proceed, Before life's joys our grasp elude. The devil!thou hast hands and feet, And head and heart are also thine; What I enjoywith relish sweet, Is it on that account less mine? If for six stallions I can pay,Do I not own their strength and speed? A proper man I dash away, As theirtwo dozen legs were mine indeed. Up then, from idle pondering free, Andforth into the world with me! I tell you what; - your speculative churl Is like abeast which some ill spirit leads, On barren wilderness, in ceaseless whirl,While all around lie fair and verdant meads.

　　Faust

　　But how shall we begin?

　　Mephistopheles

　　We will go hence with speed, A place of torment this indeed! A precious life,thyself to bore, And some few youngster evermore! Leave that to neighbourPaunch! - withdraw, Why wilt thou plague thyself with thrashing straw? Thevery best that thou dost know Thou dar'st not to the striplings show. One inthe passage now doth wait!

　　Faust

　　I'm in no mood to see him now.

　　Mephistopheles

　　Poor lad! He must be tired, I trow; He must not go disconsolate. Hand methy cap and gown; the mask Is for my purpose quite first rate. (He changeshis dress.) Now leave it to my wit! I ask But quarter of an hour; meanwhileequip, And make all ready for our pleasant trip!(Exit Faust.)

　　Mephistopheles And A Student

　　Mephistopheles (in Faust's long gown)

　　Mortal! the loftiest attributes of men, Reason and Knowledge, only thuscontemn, Still let the Prince of lies, without control, With shows, and mockingcharms delude thy soul, I have thee unconditionally then! Fate hath endow'dhim with an ardent mind, Which unrestrain'd still presses on for ever, Andwhose precipitate endeavour Earth's joys o'erleaping, leaveth them behind.Him will I drag through life's wild waste, Through scenes of vapid dulness,where at last Bewilder'd, he shall falter, and stick fast; And, still to mock hisgreedy haste, Viands and drink shall float his craving lips beyond Vainly he'llseek refreshment, anguish - tost, And were he not the devil's by his bond, Yetmust his soul infallibly be lost!

　　A Student enters

　　Student

　　But recently I've quitted home, Full of devotion am I come A man to knowand hear, whose name With reverence is known to fame.Mephistopheles

　　Your courtesy much flatters me! A man like other men you see; Pray haveyou yet applied elsewhere?

　　Student

　　I would entreat your friendly care! I've youthful blood and courage high; Ofgold I bring a fair supply; To let me go my mother was not fain; But here Ilonged true knowledge to attain.

　　Mephistopheles

　　You've hit upon the very place.

　　Student

　　And yet my steps I would retrace. These walls, this melancholy room,O'erpower me with a sense of gloom; The space is narrow, nothing green, Nofriendly tree is to be seen: And in these halls, with benches filled, distraught,Sight, hearing fail me, and the power of thought.Mephistopheles

　　It all depends on habit. Thus at first The infant takes not kindly to the breast,But before long, its eager thirst Is fain to slake with hearty zest: Thus at thebreasts of wisdom day by day With keener relish you'll your thirst allay.Student

　　Upon her neck I fain would hang with joy; To reach it, say, what means mustI employ?

　　Mephistopheles

　　Explain, ere further time we lose, What special faculty you choose?Student

　　Profoundly learned I would grow, What heaven contains would comprehend,O'er earth's wide realm my gaze extend, Nature and science I desire to know.Mephistopheles

　　Your are upon the proper track, I find; Take heed, let nothing dissipate yourmind.

　　Student

　　My heart and soul are in the chase! Though to be sure I fain would seize, Onpleasant summer holidays, A little liberty and careless ease.Mephistopheles

　　Use well your time, so rapidly it flies; Method will teach you time to win;Hence, my young friend, I would advise, With college logic to begin! Thenwill your mind be so well braced, In Spanish boots so tightly laced, That on'twill circumspectly creep, Thought's beaten track securely keep, Nor will it,ignis - fatuus like, Into the path of error strike. Then many a day they'll teachyou how The mind's spontaneous acts, till now As eating and as drinking free,Require a process; - one! two! three! In truth the subtle web of thought Is likethe weaver's fabric wrought: One treadle moves a thousand lines, Swift dartthe shuttles to and fro, Unseen the threads together flow, A thousand knotsone stroke combines. Then forward steps your sage to show, And prove toyou, it must be so; The first being so, and so the second, The third and fourthdeduc'd we see; And if there were no first and second, Nor third nor fourthwould ever be. This, scholars of all countries prize, Yet 'mong themselves noweavers rise. He who would know and treat of aught alive, Seeks first theliving spirit thence to drive: Then are the lifeless fragments in his hand, Thereonly fails, alas! the spirit - band. This process, chemists name, in learnedthesis, Mocking themselves, Naturae encheiresis.Student

　　Your words I cannot full comprehend.

　　Mephistopheles

　　In a short time you will improve, my friend, When of scholastic forms youlearn the use; And how by method all things to reduce.Student

　　So doth all this my brain confound, As if a mill - wheel there were turninground.

　　Mephistopheles

　　And next, before aught else you learn, You must with zeal to metaphysicsturn! There see that you profoundly comprehend, What doth the limit of man'sbrain transcend; For that which is or is not in the head A sounding phrase willserve you in good stead. But before all strive this half year From one fix'dorder ne'er to swerve! Five lectures daily you must hear; The hour stillpunctually observe! Yourself with studious zeal prepare, And closely in yourmanual look, Hereby may you be quite aware That all he utters standeth in thebook; Yet write away without cessation, As at the Holy Ghost's dictation!Student

　　This, Sir, a second time you need not say! Your counsel I appreciate quite;What we possess in black and white, We can in peace and comfort bearaway.

　　Mephistopheles

　　A faculty I pray you name.

　　Student

　　For jurisprudence, some distaste I own.

　　Mephistopheles

　　To me this branch of science is well known, And hence I cannot yourrepugnance blame. Customs and laws in every place, Like a disease, an heir -loom dread, Still trail their curse from race to race, And furtively abroad theyspread. To nonsense, reason's self they turn; Beneficence becomes a pest;Woe unto thee, that thou'rt a grandson born! As for the law born with us,unexpressed; That law, alas, none careth to discern.Student

　　You deepen my dislike. The youth Whom you instruct, is blest in sooth! Totry theology I feel inclined.

　　Mephistopheles

　　I would not lead you willingly astray, But as regards this science, you will findSo hard it is to shun the erring way, And so much hidden poison lies therein,Which scarce can you discern from medicine. Here too it is the best, to listenbut to one, And by the master's words to swear alone. To sum up all - Towords hold fast! Then the safe gate securely pass'd, You'll reach the fane ofcertainty at last.

　　Student

　　But then some meaning must the words convey.

　　Mephistopheles

　　Right! But o'er - anxious thought, you'll find of no avail, For there preciselywhere ideas fail, A word comes opportunely into play Most admirableweapons words are found, On words a system we securely ground, In wordswe can conveniently believe, Nor of a single jot can we a word bereave.Student

　　Your pardon for my importunity; Yet once more must I trouble you: Onmedicine, I'll thank you to supply A pregnant utterance or two! Three years!how brief the appointed tide! The field, heaven knows, is all too wide! If but afriendly hint be thrown, 'Tis easier then to feel one's way.Mephistopheles (aside)

　　I'm weary of the dry pedantic tone, And must again the genuine devil play.(Aloud)

　　Of medicine the spirit's caught with ease, The great and little world you studythrough, That things may then their course pursue, As heaven may please. Invain abroad you range through science' ample space, Each man learns onlythat which learn he can; Who knows the moment to embrace, He is yourproper man. In person you are tolerably made, Nor in assurance will you bedeficient: Self - confidence acquire, be not afraid, Others will then esteem youa proficient. Learn chiefly with the sex to deal! Their thousands ahs and ohs,These the sage doctor knows, He only from one point can heal. Assume adecent tone of courteous ease, You have them then to humour as you please.First a diploma must belief infuse, That you in your profession take the lead:You then at once those easy freedoms use For which another many a yearmust plead; Learn how to feel with nice address The dainty wrist; - and howto press, With ardent furtive glance, the slender waist, To feel how tightly it islaced.

　　Student

　　There is some sense in that! one sees the how and why.Mephistopheles

　　Grey is, young friend, all theory: And green of life the golden tree.Student

　　I swear it seemeth like a dream to me. May I some future time repeat my visit,To hear on what your wisdom grounds your views?Mephistopheles

　　Command my humble service when you choose.

　　Student

　　Ere I retire, one boon I must solicit: Here is my album, do not, Sir, deny Thistoken of your favour!

　　Mephistopheles

　　Willingly!

　　(He writes and returns the book.)

　　Student (reads)

　　Eritis Sicut Deus, Scientes Bonum Et Malum (He reverently closes the bookand retires.)

　　Mephistopheles

　　Let but this ancient proverb be your rule, My cousin follow still, the wilysnake, And with your likeness to the gods, poor fool, Ere long be sure yourpoor sick heart will quake!

　　Faust (enters)

　　Whither away?

　　Mephistopheles

　　"Tis thine our course to steer. The little world, and then the great we'll view.With what delight, what profit too, Thou'lt revel through thy gay career!Faust

　　Despite my length of beard I need The easy manners that insure success; Th'attempt I fear can ne'er succeed; To mingle in the world I want address; I stillhave an embarrass'd air, and then I feel myself so small with other men.Mephistopheles

　　Time, my good friend, will all that's needful give; Be only self - possessed, andthou hast learn'd to live.

　　Faust

　　But how are we to start, I pray? Steeds, servants, carriage, where are they?Mephistopheles

　　We've but to spread this mantle wide, 'Twill serve whereon through air toride, No heavy baggage need you take, When we our bold excursion make,A little gas, which I will soon prepare, Lifts us from earth; aloft through air,Light laden we shall swiftly steer; I wish you joy of your new life - career.Auerbach's Cellar In Leipzig

　　A Drinking Party

　　Frosch

　　No drinking? Naught a laugh to raise? None of your gloomy looks, I pray!You, who so bright were wont to blaze, Are dull as wetted straw to - day.Brander

　　'Tis all your fault; your part you do not bear, No beastliness, no folly.Frosch

　　(pours a glass of wine over his head)

　　There, You have them both!

　　Brander

　　You double beast!

　　Frosch

　　'Tis what you ask'd me for, at least!

　　Siebel

　　Whoever quarrels, turn him out! With open throat drink, roar, and shout.Hollo! Hollo! Ho!

　　Altmayer

　　Zounds, fellow, cease your deaf'ning cheers! Bring cotton - wool! He splitsmy ears.

　　Siebel

　　'Tis when the roof rings back the tone, Then first the full power of the bass isknown.

　　Frosch

　　Right! out with him who takes offence! A! tara lara da!Altmayer

　　A! tara lara da!

　　Frosch

　　Our throats are tuned. Come let's commence!

　　(Sings)

　　The holy Roman empire now, How holds it still together?Brander

　　An ugly song! a song political! A song offensive! Thank God, every morn Torule the Roman empire, that you were not born! I bless my stars at least thatmine is not Either a kaiser's or a chancellor's lot. Yet 'mong ourselves shouldone still lord it o'er the rest; That we elect a pope I now suggest. Ye know,what quality ensures A man's success, his rise secures.Frosch (sings)

　　Bear, lady nightingale above, Ten thousand greetings to my love.Siebel

　　No greetings to a sweetheart! No love - songs shall there be!Frosch

　　Love - greetings and love kisses! Thou shalt not hinder me!(Sings)

　　Undo the bolt! in silly night, Undo the bolt! the lover wakes. Shut to the bolt!when morning breaks.

　　Siebel

　　Ay, sing, sing on, praise her with all thy might! My turn to laugh will comesome day. Me hath she jilted once, you the same trick she'll play. Somegnome her lover be! where cross - roads meet,

　　With her to play the fool; or old he - goat, From Blocksberg coming in swiftgallop, bleat A good night to her, from his hairy throat! A proper lad ofgenuine flesh and blood, Is for the damsel far too good; The greeting she shallhave from me, To smash her window - panes will be!Brander (striking on the table)

　　Silence! Attend! to me give ear! Confess, sirs, I know how to live: Some love- sick folk are sitting here! Hence, 'tis but fit, their hearts to cheer, That I agood - night strain to them should give. Hark! of the newest fashion is mysong! Strike boldly in the chorus, clear and strong!(He sings)

　　Once in a cellar lived a rat, He feasted there on butter, Until his paunchbecame as fat As that of Doctor Luther. The cook laid poison for the guest,Then was his heart with pangs oppress'd, As if his frame love wasted.Chorus (shouting)

　　As if his frame love wasted.

　　Brander

　　He ran around, he ran abroad, Of every puddle drinking. The house with ragehe scratch'd and gnaw'd, In vain, - he fast was sinking; Full many an anguish'dbound he gave, Nothing the hapless brute could save, As if his frame lovewasted.

　　Chorus

　　As if his frame love wasted.

　　Brander

　　By torture driven, in open day, The kitchen he invaded, Convulsed upon thehearth he lay, With anguish sorely jaded; The poisoner laugh'd, Ha! ha! quothshe, His life is ebbing fast, I see, As if his frame love wasted.Chorus

　　As if his frame love wasted.

　　Siebel

　　How the dull boors exulting shout! Poison for the poor rats to strew A fineexploit it is no doubt.

　　Brander

　　They, as it seems, stand well with you!

　　Altmayer

　　Old bald - pate! with the paunch profound! The rat's mishap hath tamed hisnature; For he his counterpart hath found Depicted in the swollen creature.Auerbach's Cellar - Faust And Mephistopheles EnterFaust And Mephistopheles

　　Mephistopheles

　　I now must introduce to you Before aught else, this jovial crew, To show howlightly life may glide away; With tse folk here each day's a holiday. With littlewit and much content, Each on his own small round intent, Like sportive kittenwith its tail; While no sick - headache they bewail, And while their host willcredit give, Joyous and free from care they live.Brander

　　They're off a journey, that is clear, From their strange manners; they havescarce been here An hour.

　　Frosch

　　You're right! Leipzig's the place for me! 'Tis quite a little Paris; people thereAcquire a certain easy finish'd air.

　　Siebel

　　What take you now these travellers to be?

　　Frosch

　　Let me alone! O'er a full glass you'll see, As easily I'll worm their secret out,As draw an infant's tooth. I've not a doubt That my two gentlemen are noblyborn, They look dissatisfied and full of scorn.Brander

　　They are but mountebanks, I'll lay a bet!

　　Altmayer

　　Most like.

　　Frosch

　　Mark me, I'll screw it from them yet!

　　Mephistopheles (to Faust)

　　These fellows would not scent the devil out, E'en though he had them by thevery throat!

　　Faust

　　Good - morrow, gentlemen!

　　Siebel

　　Thanks for your fair salute.

　　(Aside, glancing at Mephistopheles,)

　　How! goes the fellow on a halting foot?

　　Mephistopheles

　　Is it permitted here with you to sit? Then though good wine is not forthcominghere, Good company at least our hearts will cheer.Altmayer

　　A dainty gentleman, no doubt of it.

　　Frosch

　　You're doubtless recently from Rippach? Pray, Did you with Master Hansthere chance to sup?

　　Mephistopheles

　　To - day we pass'd him, but we did not stop! When last we met him he hadmuch to say Touching his cousins, and to each he sent Full many a greetingand kind compliment. (With an inclination towards Frosch.)Altmayer (aside to Frosch)

　　You have it there!

　　Siebel

　　Faith! he's a knowing one!

　　Frosch

　　Have patience! I will show him up anon!

　　Mephistopheles

　　We heard erewhile, unless I'm wrong, Voices well trained in chorus pealing?Certes, most choicely here must song Re - echo from this vaulted ceiling!Frosch

　　That you're an amateur one plainly sees!

　　Mephistopheles

　　Oh no, though strong the love, I cannot boast much skill.Altmayer

　　Give us a song!

　　Mephistopheles

　　As many as you will.

　　Siebel

　　But be it a brand new one, if you please!

　　Mephistopheles

　　But recently returned from Spain are we, The pleasant land of wine andminstrelsy.

　　(Sings)

　　A king there was once reigning, Who had a goodly fleaFrosch

　　Hark! did you rightly catch the words? a flea! An odd sort of a guest heneeds must be.

　　Mephistopheles (sings)

　　A king there was once reigning, Who had a goodly flea, Him loved he withoutfeigning, As his own son were he! His tailor then he summon'd, The tailor tohim goes: Now measure me the youngster For jerkin and for hose!Brander

　　Take proper heed, the tailor strictly charge, The nicest measurement to take,And as he loves his head, to make The hose quite smooth and not too large!Mephistopheles

　　In satin and in velvet, Behold the yonker dressed; Bedizen'd o'er with ribbons,A cross upon his breast. Prime minister they made him, He wore a star ofstate; And all his poor relations Were courtiers, rich and great.The gentlemen and ladies At court were sore distressed; The queen and allher maidens Were bitten by the pest, And yet they dared not scratch them,Or chase the fleas away. If we are bit, we catch them, And crack withoutdelay.

　　Chorus (shouting)

　　If we are bit, &c.

　　Frosch

　　Bravo! That's the song for me!

　　Siebel

　　Such be the fate of every flea!

　　Brander

　　With clever finger catch and kill!

　　Altmayer

　　Hurrah for wine and freedom still!

　　Mephistopheles

　　Were but your wine a trifle better, friend, A glass to freedom I would gladlydrain,

　　Siebel

　　You'd better not repeat those words again!

　　Mephistopheles

　　I am afraid the landlord to offend; Else freely I would treat each worthy guestFrom our own cellar to the very best.

　　Siebel

　　Out with it then! Your doings I'll defend.

　　Frosch

　　Give a good glass, and straight we'll praise you, one and all. Only let not yoursamples be too small; For if my judgment you desire, Certes, an amplemouthful I require.

　　Altmayer (aside)

　　I guess they're from the Rhenish land.

　　Mephistopheles

　　Fetch me a gimlet here!

　　Brander

　　Say, what therewith to bore? You cannot have the wine - casks at the door?Altmayer

　　Our landlord's tool - basket behind doth yonder stand.Mephistopheles (takes the gimlet)

　　(To Frosch)

　　Now only say! what liquor will you take?

　　Frosch

　　How mean you that? have you of every sort?

　　Mephistopheles

　　Each may his own selection make.

　　Altmayer (to Frosch)

　　Ha! Ha! You lick your lips already at the thought.Frosch

　　Good, If I have my choice, the Rhenish I propose; For still the fairest gifts thefatherland bestows.

　　Mephistopheles

　　(boring a hole in the edge of the table opposite to where Frosch is sitting)Give me a little wax - and make some stoppers - quick!Altmayer

　　Why, this is nothing but a juggler's trick!

　　Mephistopheles (to Brander)

　　And you?

　　Brander

　　Champagne's the wine for me; Right brisk, and sparkling let it be!(Mephistopheles bores; one of the party has in the meantime prepared thewax - stoppers and stopped the holes.)

　　Brander

　　What foreign is one always can't decline, What's good is often scatter'd farapart. The French your genuine German hates with all his heart, Yet has arelish for their wine.

　　Siebel

　　(as Mephistopheles approaches him)

　　I like not acid wine, I must allow, Give ma a glass of genuine sweet!Mephistopheles (bores)

　　Tokay

　　Shall, if you wish it, flow without delay.

　　Altmayer

　　Come! look me in the face! no fooling now! You are but making fun of us, Itrow.

　　Mephistopheles

　　Ah! ah! that would indeed be making free With such distinguished guests.Come, no delay; What liquor can I serve you with, I pray?Altmayer

　　Only be quick, it matters not to me. (After the holes are bored and stopped.)Mephistopheles (with strange gestures)

　　Grapes the vine - stock bears, Horns the buck - goat wears! Wine is sap, thevine is wood, The wooden board yields wine as good. With a deeper glanceand true The mysteries of nature view! Have faith and here's a miracle! Yourstoppers draw and drink your fill!

　　Flowing Wines - Visionary Scenes

　　All

　　(as they draw the stoppers and the wine chosen by each runs into his glass)Oh beauteous spring, which flows so far!

　　Mephistopheles

　　Spill not a single drop, of this beware!

　　(They drink repeatedly.)

　　All (sing)

　　Happy as cannibals are we, Or as five hundred swine.Mephistopheles

　　They're in their glory, mark their elevation!

　　Faust

　　Let's hence, nor here our stay prolong.

　　Mephistopheles

　　Attend, of brutishness ere long You'll see a glorious revelation.Siebel

　　(drinks carelessly; the wine is spilt upon the ground, and turns to flame)Help! fire! help! Hell is burning!

　　Mephistopheles

　　(addressing the flames)

　　Stop, Kind element, be still, I say!

　　(To the Company.)

　　Of purgatorial fire as yet 'tis but a drop.

　　Siebel

　　What means the knave! For this you'll dearly pay! Us, it appears, you do notknow.

　　Frosch

　　Such tricks a second time he'd better show!

　　Altmayer

　　Methinks'twere well we pack'd him quietly away.Siebel

　　What, sir! with us your hocus - pocus play!

　　Mephistopheles

　　Silence, old wine - cask!

　　Siebel

　　How! add insult, too! Vile broomstick!

　　Brander

　　Hold, or blows shall rain on you!

　　Altmayer

　　(draws a stopper out of the table; fire springs out against him)I burn! I burn!

　　Siebel

　　'Tis sorcery, I vow! Strike home! The fellow is fair game, I trow!(They draw their knives and attack Mephistopheles.)Mephistopheles (with solemn gestures)

　　Visionary scenes appear! Words delusive cheat the ear! Be ye there, and beye here!

　　(They stand amazed and gaze at each other.)

　　Altmayer

　　Where am I? What a beauteous land!

　　Frosch

　　Vineyards! unless my sight deceives?

　　Siebel

　　And clust'ring grapes too, close at hand!

　　Brander

　　And underneath the spreading leaves, What stems there be! What grapes Isee!

　　(He seizes Siebel by the nose. The others reciprocally do the same, and raisetheir knives.)

　　Mephistopheles (as above)

　　Delusion, from their eyes the bandage take! Note how the devil loves a jest tobreak!

　　(He disappears with Faust; the fellows draw back from one another.)Siebel

　　What was it?

　　Altmayer

　　How?

　　Frosch

　　Was that your nose?

　　Brander (to Siebel)

　　And look, my hand doth thine enclose!

　　Altmayer

　　I felt a shock, it went through every limb! A chair! I'm fainting! All thingsswim!

　　Frosch

　　Say what has happened, what's it all about?

　　Siebel

　　Where is the fellow? Could I scent him out, His body from his soul I'd soondivide!

　　Altmayer

　　With my own eyes, upon a cask astride, Forth through the cellar - door I sawhim ride Heavy as lead my feet are growing.

　　(Turning to the table.)

　　I wonder is the wine still flowing!

　　Siebel

　　'Twas all delusion, cheat and lie.

　　Frosch

　　'Twas wine I drank, most certainly.

　　Brander

　　But with the grapes how was it, pray?

　　Altmayer

　　That none may miracles believe, who now will say?The Witch's Kitchen - Faust, Mephistopheles And The MonkiesA large caldron hangs over the fire on a low hearth; various figures appear inthe vapour rising from it. A Female Monkey sits beside the caldron to skim it,and watch that it does not boil over. The Male Monkey with the young onesis seated near, warming himself. The walls and ceiling are adorned with thestrangest articles of witch - furniture.

　　Faust, Mephistopheles

　　Faust

　　This senseless, juggling witchcraft I detest! Dost promise that in this foul nestOf madness, I shall be restored? Must I seek counsel from an ancient dame?And can she, by these rites abhorred, Take thirty winters from my frame?Woe's me, if thou naught better canst suggest! Hope has already fled mybreast. Has neither nature nor a noble mind A balsam yet devis'd of any kind?Mephistopheles

　　My friend, you now speak sensibly. In truth, Nature a method giveth to renewthy youth: But in another book the lesson's writ; It forms a curious chapter, Iadmit.

　　Faust

　　I fain would know it.

　　Mephistopheles

　　Good! A remedy Without physician, gold, or sorcery: Away forthwith, and tothe fields repair, Begin to delve, to cultivate the ground, Thy senses andthyself confine Within the very narrowest round, Support thyself upon thesimplest fare, Live like a very brute the brutes among, Neither esteem itrobbery The acre thou dost reap, thyself to dung; This is the best method,credit me, Again at eighty to grow hale and young.Faust

　　I am not used to it, nor can myself degrade So far, as in my hand to take thespade. This narrow life would suit me not at all.Mephistopheles

　　Then we the witch must summon after all.

　　Faust

　　Will none but this old beldame do? Canst not thyself the potion brew?Mephistopheles

　　A pretty play our leisure to beguile! A thousand bridges I could buildmeanwhile. Not science only and consummate art, Patience must also bearher part. A quiet spirit worketh whole years long; Time only makes the subtleferment strong. And all things that belong thereto, Are wondrous andexceeding rare! The devil taught her, it is true; But yet the draught the devilcan't prepare.

　　(Perceiving the beasts.)

　　Look yonder, what a dainty pair! Here is the maid! the knave is there!(To the beasts)

　　It seems your dame is not a home?

　　The Monkeys

　　Gone to carouse, Out of the house, Thro' the chimney and away!Mephistopheles

　　How long is it her wont to roam?

　　The Monkeys

　　While we can warm our paws she'll stay.

　　Mephistopheles (to Faust)

　　What think you of the charming creatures?

　　Faust

　　I loathe alike their form and features!

　　Mephistopheles

　　Nay, such discourse, be it confessed, Is just the thing that pleases me thebest.

　　(To the Monkeys)

　　Tell me, ye whelps, accursed crew! What stir ye in the broth about?Monkeys

　　Coarse beggar's gruel here we stew.

　　Mephistopheles

　　Of customers you'll have a rout.

　　The He - Monkey (approaching and fawning on Mephistopheles)Quick! quick! throw the dice, Make me rich in a trice, Oh give me the prize!Alas, for myself! Had I plenty of pelf, I then should be wise.Mephistopheles

　　How blest the ape would think himself, if he Could only put into the lottery!(In the meantime the young Monkeys have been playing with a large globe,which they roll forwards)

　　The He - Monkey

　　The world behold; Unceasingly roll'd, It riseth and falleth ever; It ringeth likeglass! How brittle, alas! 'Tis hollow, and resteth never. How bright the sphere,Still brighter here! Now living am I! Dear son, beware! Nor venture there!Thou too must die! It is of clay; 'Twill crumble away; There fragments lie.Mephistopheles

　　Of what use is the sieve?

　　The He - Monkey (taking it down)

　　(He runs to the She - Monkey, and makes her look through it.)Look through the sieve! Dost know him the thief, And dar'st thou not call himso?

　　Mephistopheles (approaching the fire)

　　And then this pot?

　　The Monkeys

　　The half - witted sot! He knows not the pot! He know not the kettle!Mephistopheles

　　Unmannerly beast! Be civil at least!

　　The He - Monkey

　　Take the whisk and sit down in the settle!

　　(He makes Mephistopheles sit down.)

　　Faust

　　(who all this time has been standing before a looking - glass, nowapproaching, and now retiring from it)

　　What do I see? what form, whose charms transcend The loveliness of earth,is mirror'd here! O Love, to waft me to her sphere, To me the swiftest of thypinions lend! Alas! If I remain not rooted to this place, If to approach morenear I'm fondly lur'd, Her image fades, in veiling mist obscur'd! Model ofbeauty both in form and face! Is't possible? Hath woman charms so rare? Inthis recumbent form, supremely fair, The essence must I see of heavenlygrace? Can aught so exquisite on earth be found?Mephistopheles

　　The six days' labour of a god, my friend, Who doth himself cry bravo, at theend, By something clever doubtless should be crown'd. For this time gazeyour fill, and when you please Just such a prize for you I can provide; Howblest is he to whom kind fate decrees, To take her to his home, a lovely bride!(Faust continues to gaze into the mirror. Mephistopheles stretching himself onthe settle and playing with the whisk, continues to speak.)Here sit I, like a king upon his throne; My sceptre this; - the crown I wantalone.

　　The Monkeys

　　(who have hitherto been making all sorts of strange gestures, bringMephistopheles a crown, with loud cries)

　　Oh, be so good, With sweat and with blood The crown to lime!(They handle the crown awkwardly and break it in two pieces, with whichthey skip about.)

　　'Twas fate's decree! We speak and see! We hear and rhyme.Faust (before the mirror)

　　Woe's me! well - nigh distraught I feel!

　　Mephistopheles

　　(pointing to the beasts)

　　And even my own head almost begins to reel.

　　The Monkeys

　　If good luck attend, If fitly things blend, Our jargon with thought And withreason is fraught!

　　Faust (as above)

　　A flame is kindled in my breast! Let us begone! nor linger here!Mephistopheles

　　(in the same position)

　　It now at least must be confessed, That poets sometimes are sincere.(The caldron which the She - Monkey has neglected begins to boil over; agreat flame arises, which streams up the chimney. The Witch comes down thechimney with horrible cries.)

　　The Witch Returns

　　The Witch

　　Ough! ough! ough! ough! Accursed brute! accursed sow! The caldron dostneglect, for shame! Accursed brute to scorch the dame!(Perceiving Faust and Mephistopheles)

　　Whom have we here? Who's sneaking here? Whence are ye come? Withwhat desire? The plague of fire Your bones consume!(She dips the skimming - ladle into the caldron and throws flames at Faust,Mephistopheles, and the Monkeys. The Monkeys whimper.)Mephistopheles

　　(twirling the whisk which he holds in his hand, and striking among the glassesand pots)

　　Dash! Smash! There lies the glass! There lies the slime! 'Tis but a jest; I butkeep time, Thou hellish pest, To thine own chime!(While the Witch steps back in rage and astonishment.)Dost know me! Skeleton! Vile scarecrow, thou! Thy lord and master dostthou know? What holds me, that I deal not now Thee and thine apes astunning blow? No more respect to my red vest dost pay? Does my cock'sfeather no allegiance claim? Have I my visage masked to - day? Must I beforced myself to name?

　　The Witch

　　Master, forgive this rude salute! But I perceive no cloven foot. And your tworavens, where are they?

　　Mephistopheles

　　This once I must admit your plea; For truly I must own that we Each otherhave not seen for many a day. The culture, too, that shapes the world, at lastHath e'en the devil in its sphere embraced; The northern phantom from thescene hath pass'd, Tail, talons, horns, are nowhere to be traced! As for thefoot, with which I can't dispense, 'Twould injure me in company, and hence,Like many a youthful cavalier, False calves I now have worn for many a year.The Witch (dancing)

　　I am beside myself with joy, To see once more the gallant Satan here!Mephistopheles

　　Woman, no more that name employ!

　　The Witch

　　But why! what mischief hath it done?

　　Mephistopheles

　　To fable - books it now doth appertain; But people from the change havenothing won. Rid of the evil one, the evil ones remain. Lord Baron call thoume, so is the matter good; Of other cavaliers the mien I wear. Dost make noquestion of my gentle blood; See here, this is the scutcheon that I bear! (Hemakes an unseemly gesture.)

　　The Witch

　　(laughing immoderately)

　　Ha! Ha! Just like yourself! You are, I ween, The same mad wag that youhave ever been!

　　Mephistopheles (to Faust)

　　My friend, learn this to understand, I pray! To deal with witches this is still theway.

　　The Witch

　　Now tell me, gentlemen, what you desire?

　　Mephistopheles

　　Of your known juice a goblet we require. But for the very oldest let me ask;Double its strength with years doth grow.

　　The Witch

　　Most willingly! And here I have a flask, From which I've sipp'd myself erenow; What's more, it doth no longer stink; To you a glass I joyfully will give.(Aside.)

　　If unprepar'd, however, this man drink, He hath not, as you know, an hour tolive.

　　Mephistopheles

　　He's my good friend, with whom 'twill prosper well; I grudge him not thechoicest of thy store. Now draw thy circle, speak thy spell, And straight abumper for him pour!

　　Ha! Ha! Just like yourself! You are, I ween, The same mad wag that youhave ever been!

　　Mephistopheles (to Faust)

　　My friend, learn this to understand, I pray! To deal with witches this is still theway.

　　The Witch

　　Now tell me, gentlemen, what you desire?

　　Mephistopheles

　　Of your known juice a goblet we require. But for the very oldest let me ask;Double its strength with years doth grow.

　　The Witch

　　Most willingly! And here I have a flask, From which I've sipp'd myself erenow; What's more, it doth no longer stink; To you a glass I joyfully will give.(Aside.)

　　If unprepar'd, however, this man drink, He hath not, as you know, an hour tolive.

　　Mephistopheles

　　He's my good friend, with whom 'twill prosper well; I grudge him not thechoicest of thy store. Now draw thy circle, speak thy spell, And straight abumper for him pour!

　　The lofty power Of wisdom's dower, From all the world conceal'd! Whothinketh not, To him I wot, Unsought it is reveal'd.Faust

　　What nonsense doth the hag propound? My brain it doth well - nighconfound. A hundred thousand fools or more, Methinks I hear in chorus roar.Mephistopheles

　　Incomparable Sibyl cease, I pray! Hand us the liquor without more delay.And to the very brim the goblet crown! My friend he is, and need not beafraid; Besides, he is a man of many a grade, Who hath drunk deep already.(The Witch, with many ceremonies, pours the liquor into a cup; as Faust lifts itto his mouth, a light flame arises.)

　　Mephistopheles

　　Gulp it down! No hesitation! It will prove A cordial, and your heart inspire!What! with the devil hand and glove, And yet shrink back afraid of fire? (TheWitch dissolves the circle. Faust steps out.)

　　Mephistopheles

　　Now forth at once! thou dar'st not rest.

　　Witch

　　And much, sir, may the liquor profit you!

　　Mephistopheles (to the Witch)

　　And if to pleasure thee I aught can do, Pray on Walpurgis mention thyrequest.

　　Witch

　　Here is a song, sung o'er, sometimes you'll see, That 'twill a singular effectproduce.

　　Mephistopheles (to Faust)

　　Come, quick, and let thyself be led by me; Thou must perspire, in order thatthe juice Thy frame may penetrate through every part. Then noble idleness Ithee will teach to prize, And soon with ecstasy thou'lt recognise How Cupidstirs and gambols in thy heart.

　　Faust

　　Let me but gaze one moment in the glass! Too lovely was that female form!Mephistopheles

　　Nay! nay! A model which all women shall surpass, In flesh and blood ere longthou shalt survey.

　　(Aside.)

　　As works that draught, thou presently shalt greet A Helen in each womanthou dost meet.

　　A Street - Faust Meets Margaret

　　Faust (Margaret passing by)

　　Faust And Margaret: The meeting of Faust and Margaret.]Faust

　　Fair lady, may I thus make free To offer you my arm and company?Margaret

　　I am no lady, am not fair, Can without escort home repair.(She disengages herself and exit.)

　　Faust

　　By heaven! This girl is fair indeed! No form like hers can I recall. Virtue shehath, and modest heed, Is piquant too, and sharp withal. Her cheek's softlight, her rosy lips, No length of time will e'er eclipse! Her downward glancein passing by, Deep in my heart is stamp'd for aye; How curt and sharp heranswer too, To ecstasy the feeling grew!

　　(Mephistopheles enters.)

　　Faust

　　This girl must win for me! Dost hear?

　　Mephistopheles

　　Which?

　　Faust

　　She who but now passed.

　　Mephistopheles

　　What! She? She from confession cometh here, From every sin absolved andfree; I crept near the confessor's chair. All innocence her virgin soul, For nextto nothing went she there; O'er such as she I've no control!Faust

　　She's past fourteen.

　　Mephistopheles

　　You really talk

　　Like any gay Lothario, Who every floweret from its stalk Would pluck, anddeems nor grace, nor truth, Secure against his arts, forsooth! This ne'er theless won't always do.

　　Faust

　　Sir Moralizer, prithee, pause; Nor plague me with your tiresome laws!Goethe

　　To cut the matter short, my friend, She must this very night be mine, And if tohelp me you decline, Midnight shall see our compact end.Mephistopheles

　　What may occur just bear in mind! A fortnight's space, at least, I need, A fitoccasion but to find.

　　Faust

　　With but seven hours I could succeed; Nor should I want the devil's wile, Soyoung a creature to beguile.

　　Mephistopheles

　　Like any Frenchman now you speak, But do not fret, I pray; why seek Tohurry to enjoyment straight? The pleasure is not half so great, As when at firstaround, above, With all the fooleries of love, The puppet you can knead andmould As in Italian story oft is told.

　　Faust

　　No such incentives do I need.

　　Mephistopheles

　　But now, without offense or jest! You cannot quickly, I protest, In winningthis sweet child succeed. By storm we cannot take the fort, To stratagem wemust resort.

　　Faust

　　Conduct me to her place of rest! Some token of the angel bring! A kerchieffrom her snowy breast, A garter bring me, - any thing!Mephistopheles

　　That I my anxious zeal may prove, Your pangs to sooth and aid your love, Asingle moment will we not delay, Will lead you to her room this very day.Faust

　　And shall I see her? - Have her?

　　Mephistopheles

　　No! She to a neighbour's house will go; But in her atmosphere alone, Thetedious hours meanwhile you may employ, In blissful dreams of future joy.Faust

　　Can we go now?

　　Mephistopheles

　　'Tis yet too soon.

　　Faust

　　Some present for my love procure!

　　(Exit.)

　　Mephistopheles

　　Presents so soon! 'tis well! success is sure! Full many a goodly place I know,And treasures buried long ago; I must a bit o'erlook them now.(Exit.)

　　Evening - A Small And Neat Room

　　Margaret

　　(braiding and binding up her hair)

　　I would give something now to know, Who yonder gentleman could be! Hehad a gallant air, I trow, And doubtless was of high degree: That written onhis brow was seen Nor else would he so bold have been.(Exit.)

　　Mephistopheles

　　Come in! tread softly! be discreet!

　　Faust (after a pause)

　　Begone and leave me, I entreat!

　　Mephistopheles (looking round)

　　Not every maiden is so neat

　　(Exit.)

　　Faust (gazing round)

　　Welcome sweet twilight, calm and blest, That in this hallow'd precinct reigns!Fond yearning love, inspire my breast, Feeding on hope's sweet dew thyblissful pains! What stillness here environs me! Content and order broodaround. What fulness in this poverty! In this small cell what bliss profound!(He throws himself on the leather arm - chair beside the bed)Receive me thou, who hast in thine embrace, Welcom'd in joy and grief theages flown! How oft the children of a by - gone race Have cluster'd round thispatriarchal throne! Haply she, also, whom I hold so dear, For Christmas gift,with grateful joy possess'd, Hath with the full round cheek of childhood, here,Her grandsire's wither'd hand devoutly press'd. Maiden! I feel thy spirit hauntthe place, Breathing of order and abounding grace. As with a mother's voice itprompteth thee, The pure white cover o'er the board to spread, To strew thecrisping sand beneath thy tread. Dear hand! so godlike in its ministry! The hutbecomes a paradise through thee! And here - (He raises the bed - curtain.)How thrills my pulse with strange delight! Here could I linger hours untold;Thou, Nature, didst in vision bright, The embryo angel here unfold. Here laythe child, her bosom warm With life; while steeped in slumber's dew, Toperfect grace, her godlike form, With pure and hallow'd weavings grew!And thou! ah here what seekest thou? How quails mine inmost being now!What wouldst thou here? what makes thy heart so sore? Unhappy Faust! Iknow thee now no more.

　　Do I a magic atmosphere inhale? Erewhile, my passion would not brookdelay! Now in a pure love - dream I melt away. Are we the sport of everypassing gale?

　　Should she return and enter now, How wouldst thou rue thy guilty flame!Proud vaunter - thou wouldst hide thy brow, And at her feet sink down withshame.

　　Mephistopheles

　　Quick! quick! below I see her there.

　　Faust

　　Away! I will return no more!

　　Mephistopheles

　　Here is a casket, with a store Of jewels, which I got elsewhere Just lay it inthe press; make haste! I swear to you, 'twill turn her brain; Therein sometrifles I have placed, Wherewith another to obtain. But child is child, and playis play.

　　Faust

　　I know not - shall I?

　　Mephistopheles

　　Do you ask? Perchance you would retain the treasure? If such your wish, whythen, I say, Henceforth absolve me from my task, Nor longer waste yourhours of leisure. I trust you're not by avarice led! I rub my hands, I scratch myhead,

　　(He places the casket in the press and closes the lock.)Now quick! Away! That soon the sweet young creature may The wish andpurpose of your heart obey; Yet stand you there As would you to the lecture- room repair, As if before you stood, Arrayed in flesh and blood, Physicsand metaphysics weird and grey! Away!

　　(Exeunt.)

　　Margaret (with a lamp)

　　Here 'tis so close, so sultry now,

　　(She opens the window.)

　　Yet out of doors 'tis not so warm. I feel so strange, I know not how I wish mymother would come home. Through me there runs a shuddering I'm but afoolish timid thing!

　　(While undressing herself she begins to sing.)There was a king in Thule, True even to the grave; To whom his dyingmistress A golden beaker gave.

　　At every feast he drained it, Naught was to him so dear, And often as hedrained it, Gush'd from his eyes the tear.

　　When death came, unrepining His cities o'er he told; All to his heir resigning,Except his cup of gold.

　　With many a knightly vassal At a royal feast sat he, In yon proud hallancestral, In his castle o'er the sea.

　　Up stood the jovial monarch, And quaff'd his last life's glow, Then hurled thehallow'd goblet Into the flood below.

　　He saw it splashing, drinking, And plunging in the sea; His eyes meanwhilewere sinking, And never again drank he.

　　(She opens the press to put away her clothes, and perceives the casket.)How comes this lovely casket here? The press I locked, of that I'm confident.'Tis very wonderful! What's in it I can't guess; Perhaps 'twas brought by someone in distress, And left in pledge for loan my mother lent.Here by a ribbon hangs a little key! I have a mind to open it and see!Heavens! only look! what have we here! In all my days ne'er saw I such asight! Jewels! which any noble dame might wear, For some high pageantrichly dight! This chain - how would it look on me! These splendid gems,whose may they be?

　　(She puts them on and steps before the glass.)Were but the ear - rings only mine! Thus one has quite another air. Whatboots it to be young and fair? It doubtless may be very fine; But then, alas,none cares for you, And praise sounds half like pity too. Gold all doth lure,Gold doth secure All things. Alas, we poor!

　　Promenade - Faust And Mephistopheles

　　Faust walking thoughtfully up and down. To him MephistophelesMephistopheles

　　By all rejected love! By hellish fire I curse, Would I knew aught to make myimprecation worse!

　　Faust

　　What aileth thee? what chafes thee now so sore? A face like that I never sawbefore!

　　Mephistopheles

　　I'd yield me to the devil instantly, Did it not happen that myself am he!Faust

　　There must be some disorder in thy wit! To rave thus like a madman, is it fit?Mephistopheles

　　Think! only think! The gems for Gretchen brought, Them hath a priest nowmade his own! A glimpse of them the mother caught, And 'gan with secretfear to groan. The woman's scent is keen enough; Doth ever in the prayer -book snuff; Smells every article to ascertain Whether the thing is holy orprofane, And scented in the jewels rare, That there was not much blessingthere. "My child," she cries, "ill - gotten good Ensnares the soul, consumes theblood; With them we'll deck our Lady's shrine, She'll cheer our souls withbread divine!" At this poor Gretchen 'gan to pout; 'Tis a gift - horse, at least,she thought, And sure, he godless cannot be, Who brought them here socleverly. Straight for a priest the mother sent, Who, when he understood thejest, With what he saw was well content. "This shows a pious mind!" Quothhe: "Self - conquest is true victory. The Church hath a good stomach, she,with zest, Whole countries hath swallow'd down, And never yet a surfeitknown. The Church alone, be it confessed, Daughters, can ill - got wealthdigest."

　　Faust

　　It is a general custom, too. Practised alike by king and jew.Mephistopheles

　　With that, clasp, chain, and ring, he swept As they were mushrooms; and thecasket, Without one word of thanks, he kept, As if of nuts it were a basket.Promised reward in heaven, then forth he hied And greatly they were edified.Faust

　　And Gretchen!

　　Mephistopheles

　　In unquiet mood Knows neither what she would or should; The trinkets nightand day thinks o'er, On him who brought them, dwells still more.Faust

　　The darling's sorrow grieves me, bring Another set without delay! The first,methinks, was no great thing.

　　Mephistopheles

　　All's to my gentleman child's play!

　　Faust

　　Plan all things to achieve my end! Engage the attention of her friend! No milk- and - water devil be, And bring fresh jewels instantly!Mephistopheles

　　Ay, sir! Most gladly I'll obey.

　　(Faust exit.)

　　Mephistopheles

　　Your doting love - sick fool, with ease, Merely his lady - love to please, Sun,moon, and stars in sport would puff away.

　　(Exit.)

　　The Neighbour's House - Martha, Margaret And MephistophelesMartha (alone)

　　God pardon my dear husband, he Doth not in truth act well by me! Forth inthe world abroad to roam, And leave me on the straw at home. And yet hiswill I ne'er did thwart, God knows, I lov'd him from my heart.(She weeps.)

　　Perchance he's dead! - oh wretched state! Had I but a certificate!(Margaret comes)

　　Margaret

　　Dame Martha!

　　Martha

　　Gretchen?

　　Margaret

　　Only think! My knees beneath me well - nigh sink! Within my press I've foundto - day, Another case, of ebony. And things - magnificent they are, Morecostly than the first, by far.

　　Martha

　　You must not name it to your mother! It would to shrift, just like the other.Margaret

　　Nay look at them! now only see!

　　Martha (dresses her up)

　　Thou happy creature!

　　Margaret

　　Woe is me! Them in the street I cannot wear, Or in the church, or any where.Martha

　　Come often over here to me, The gems put on quite privately; And thenbefore the mirror walk an hour or so, Thus we shall have our pleasure too.Then suitable occasions we must seize, As at a feast, to show them bydegrees: A chain at first, pearl ear - drops then, - your mother Won't seethem, or we'll coin some tale or other.

　　Margaret

　　But, who, I wonder, could the caskets bring? I fear there's something wrongabout the thing!

　　(A knock.)

　　Good heavens! can that my mother be?

　　Martha (peering through the blind)

　　'Tis a strange gentleman, I see. Come in!

　　(Mephistopheles enters)

　　Mephistopheles

　　I've ventur'd to intrude to - day. Ladies, excuse the liberty, I pray.(He steps back respectfully before Margaret.)

　　After dame Martha Schwerdtlein I inquire!

　　Martha

　　'Tis I. Pray what have you to say to me?

　　Mephistopheles (aside to her)

　　I know you now, - and therefore will retire; At present you've distinguishedcompany. Pardon the freedom, Madam, with your leave, I will make free tocall again at eve.

　　Martha (aloud)

　　Why, child, of all strange notions, he For some grand lady taketh thee!Margaret

　　I am, in truth, of humble blood The gentleman is far too good Nor gems nortrinkets are my own.

　　Mephistopheles

　　Oh 'tis not the mere ornaments alone; Her glance and mien far more betray.Rejoiced I am that I may stay.

　　Martha

　　Your business, Sir? I long to know

　　Mephistopheles

　　Would I could happier tidings show! I trust mine errand you'll not let me rue;Your husband's dead, and greeteth you.

　　Martha

　　Is dead? True heart! Oh misery! My husband dead! Oh, I shall die!Margaret

　　Alas! good Martha! don't despair!

　　Mephistopheles

　　Now listen to the sad affair!

　　Margaret

　　I for this cause should fear to love. The loss my certain death would prove.Mephistopheles

　　Joy still must sorrow, sorrow joy attend.

　　Martha

　　Proceed, and tell the story of his end!

　　Mephistopheles

　　At Padua, in St. Anthony's, In holy ground his body lies; Quiet and cool hisplace of rest, With pious ceremonials blest.

　　Martha

　　And had you naught besides to bring?

　　Mephistopheles

　　Oh yes! one grave and solemn prayer; Let them for him three hundred massessing! But in my pockets, I have nothing there.Martha

　　No trinket! no love - token did he send! What every journeyman safe in hispouch will hoard There for remembrance fondly stored, And rather hungers,rather begs than spend!

　　Mephistopheles

　　Madam, in truth, it grieves me sore, But he his gold not lavishly hath spent.His failings too he deeply did repent, Ay! and his evil plight bewail'd still more.Margaret

　　Alas! That men should thus be doomed to woe! I for his soul will many arequiem pray.

　　Mephistopheles

　　A husband you deserve this very day; A child so worthy to be loved.Margaret

　　Ah no, That time hath not yet come for me.

　　Mephistopheles

　　If not a spouse, a gallant let it be. Among heaven's choicest gifts, I place, Sosweet a darling to embrace.

　　Margaret

　　Our land doth no such usage know.

　　Mephistopheles

　　Usage or not, it happens so.

　　Martha

　　Go on, I pray!

　　Mephistopheles

　　I stood by his bedside. Something less foul it was than dung; 'Twas straw halfrotten; yet, he as a Christian died. And sorely hath remorse his consciencewrung. "Wretch that I was," quoth he, with parting breath, "So to forsake mybusiness and my wife! Ah! the remembrance is my death, Could I but haveher pardon in this life!"

　　Martha (weeping)

　　Dear soul! I've long forgiven him, indeed!

　　Mephistopheles

　　"Though she, God knows, was more to blame than I."Martha

　　He lied! What, on the brink of death to lie!

　　Mephistopheles

　　If I am skill'd the countenance to read, He doubtless fabled as he partedhence. "No time had I to gape, or take my ease," he said, "First to getchildren, and then get them bread; And bread, too, in the very widest sense;Nor could I eat in peace even my proper share."Martha

　　What, all my truth, my love forgotten quite? My weary drudgery by day andnight!

　　Mephistopheles

　　Not so! He thought of you with tender care. Quoth he: "Heaven knows howfervently I prayed, For wife and children when from Malta bound; The prayerhath heaven with favour crowned; We took a Turkish vessel which conveyedRich store of treasure for the Sultan's court; It's own reward our gallant actionbrought; The captur'd prize was shared among the crew And of the treasure Ireceived my due."

　　Martha

　　How? Where? The treasure hath he buried, pray?Mephistopheles

　　Where the four winds have blown it, who can say? In Naples as he stroll'd, astranger there, A comely maid took pity on my friend; And gave such tokensof her love and care, That he retained them to his blessed end.Martha

　　Scoundrel! to rob his children of their bread! And all this misery, this bitterneed, Could not his course of recklessness impede!Mephistopheles

　　Well, he hath paid the forfeit, and is dead. Now were I in your place, mycounsel hear; My weeds I'd wear for one chaste year, And for another lovermeanwhile would look out.

　　Martha

　　Alas, I might search far and near, Not quickly should I find another like myfirst! There could not be a fonder fool than mine, Only he loved too wellaboard to roam; Loved foreign women too, and foreign wine, And lovedbesides the dice accurs'd.

　　Mephistopheles

　　All had gone swimmingly, no doubt, Had he but given you at home, On hisside, just as wide a range. Upon such terms, to you I swear, Myself with youwould gladly rings exchange!

　　Martha

　　The gentleman is surely pleas'd to jest!

　　Mephistopheles (aside)

　　Now to be off in time, were best! She'd make the very devil marry her.(To Margaret.)

　　How fares it with your heart?

　　Margaret

　　How mean you, Sir?

　　Mephistopheles (aside)

　　The sweet young innocent!

　　(aloud)

　　Ladies, farewell!

　　Margaret

　　Farewell!

　　Martha

　　But ere you leave us, quickly tell! I from a witness fain had heard, Where,how, and when my husband died and was interr'd. To forms I've always beenattached indeed, His death I fain would in the journals read.Mephistopheles

　　Ay, madam, what two witnesses declare Is held as valid everywhere; Agallant friend I have, not far from here, Who will for you before the judgeappear. I'll bring him straight.

　　Martha

　　I pray you do!

　　Mephistopheles

　　And this young lady, we shall find her too? A noble youth, far travelled, heShows to the sex all courtesy.

　　Margaret

　　I in his presence needs must blush for shame.

　　Mephistopheles

　　Not in the presence of a crowned king!

　　Martha

　　The garden, then, behind my house, we'll name, There we'll await you boththis evening.

　　A Street - An Evening Walk In The Garden

　　Faust. Mephistopheles

　　Faust

　　How is it now? How speeds it? Is't in train?

　　Mephistopheles

　　Bravo! I find you all aflame! Gretchen full soon your own you'll name. Thiseve, at neighbour Martha's, her you'll meet again; The woman seemsexpressly made To drive the pimp and gipsy's trade.Faust

　　Good!

　　Mephistopheles

　　But from us she something would request.

　　Faust

　　A favour claims return as this world goes.

　　Mephistopheles

　　We have on oath but duly to attest, That her dead husband's limbs,outstretch'd repose In holy ground at Padua.

　　Faust

　　Sage indeed! So I suppose we straight must journey there!Mephistopheles

　　Sancta simplicitas! For that no need! Without much knowledge we have butto swear.

　　Faust

　　If you have nothing better to suggest, Against you plan I must at once protest.Mephistopheles

　　Oh, holy man! methinks I have you there! In all your life say, have you ne'erFalse witness borne, until this hour? Have you of God, the world, and all itdoth contain, Of man, and that which worketh in his heart and brain, Notdefinitions given, in words of weight and power, With front unblushing, and adauntless breast? Yet, if into the depth of things you go, Touching thesematters, it must be confess'd, As much as of Herr Schwerdtlein's death youknow!

　　Faust

　　Thou art and dost remain liar and sophist too.Mephistopheles

　　Ay, if one did not take a somewhat deeper view! To - morrow, in all honour,thou Poor Gretchen wilt befool, and vow Thy soul's deep love, in lover'sfashion.

　　Faust

　　And from my heart.

　　Mephistopheles

　　All good and fair! Then deathless constancy thou'lt swear; Speak of one allo'ermastering passion, Will that too issue from the heart?Faust

　　Forbear! When passion sways me, and I seek to frame Fir utterance forfeeling, deep, intense, And for my frenzy finding no fit name, Sweep round theample world with every sense, Grasp at the loftiest words to speak my flame,And call the glow, wherewith I burn, Quenchless, eternal, yea, eterne Is thatof sophistry a devilish play?

　　Mephistopheles

　　Yet am I right!

　　Faust

　　Mark this, my friend, And spare my lungs; who would the right maintain, Andhath a tongue wherewith his point to gain, Will gain it in the end. But come, ofgossip I am weary quite; Because I've no resource, thou'rt in the right.A Garden

　　Margaret on Faust's arm. Martha with Mephistopheles walking up and downMargaret

　　I feel it, you but spare my ignorance, The gentleman to shame me stoops thuslow. A traveller from complaisance, Still makes the best of things; I know Toowell, my humble prattle never can Have power to entertain so wise a man.Garden Scene: Garden scene with Mephistopheles, Faust, and Margaret.Lithograph by Eugene Delacroix.]

　　Faust

　　One glance, one word from thee doth charm me more, Than the world'swisdom or the sage's lore.

　　(He kisses her hand.)

　　Margaret

　　Nay! trouble not yourself! A hand so coarse, So rude as mine, how can youkiss! What constant work at home must I not do perforce! My mother tooexacting is.

　　(They pass on.)

　　Martha

　　Thus, sir, unceasing travel is your lot?

　　Mephistopheles

　　Traffic and duty urge us! With what pain Are we compelled to leave full manya spot, Where yet we dare not once remain!

　　Martha

　　In youth's wild years, with vigour crown'd, 'Tis not amiss thus through theworld to sweep; But ah, the evil days come round! And to a lonely grave asbachelor to creep, A pleasant thing has no one found.Mephistopheles

　　The prospect fills me with dismay.

　　Martha

　　Therefore in time, dear sir, reflect, I pray.

　　(They pass on.)

　　Margaret

　　Ay, out of sight is out of mind! Politeness easy is to you; Friends everywhere,and not a few, Wiser than I am, you will find.Faust

　　O dearest, trust me, what doth pass for sense Full oft is self - conceit andblindness!

　　Margaret

　　How?

　　Faust

　　Simplicity and holy innocence, When will ye learn your hallow'd worth toknow! Ah, when will meekness and humility, Kind and all - bounteousnature's loftiest dower

　　Margaret

　　Only one little moment think of me! To think of you I shall have many an hour.Faust

　　You are perhaps much alone?

　　Margaret

　　Yes, small our household is, I own, Yet must I see to it. No maid we keep,And I must cook, sew, knit, and sweep, Still early on my feet and late; Mymother is in all things, great and small, So accurate! Not that for thrift there issuch pressing need; Than others we might make more show indeed: My fatherleft behind a small estate, A house and garden near the city - wall. But fairlyquiet now my days, I own; As soldier is my brother gone; My little sister'sdead; the babe to rear Occasion'd me some care and fond annoy; But Iwould go through all again with joy, The darling was to me so dear.Faust

　　An angel, sweet, if it resembled thee!

　　Margaret

　　I reared it up, and it grew fond of me. After my father's death it saw the day;We gave my mother up for lost, she lay In such a wretched plight, and then atlength So very slowly she regain'd her strength. Weak as she was, 'twas vainfor her to try Herself to suckle the poor babe, so I Reared it on milk andwater all alone; And thus the child became as 'twere my own; Within my armsit stretched itself and grew, And smiling, nestled in my bosom too.Faust

　　Doubtless the purest happiness was thine.

　　Margaret

　　But many weary hours, in sooth, were also mine. At night its little cradle stoodClose to my bed; so was I wide awake If it but stirred; One while I wasobliged to give it food, Or to my arms the darling take; From bed full oft mustrise, whene'er its cry I heard, And, dancing it, must pace the chamber to andfro; Stand at the wash - tub early; forthwith go To market, and then mind thecooking too To - morrow like to - day, the whole year through. Ah, sir, thusliving, it must be confess'd One's spirits are not always of the best; Yet it arelish gives to food and rest. (They pass on.)Martha

　　Poor women! we are badly off, I own; A bachelor's conversion's hard,indeed!

　　Mephistopheles

　　Madam, with one like you it rests alone, To tutor me a better course to lead.Martha

　　Speak frankly, sir, none is there you have met? Has your heart ne'er attach'ditself as yet?

　　Mephistopheles

　　One's own fire - side and a good wife are gold And pearls of price, so saysthe proverb old.

　　Martha

　　I mean, has passion never stirred your breast?Mephistopheles

　　I've everywhere been well received, I own.

　　Martha

　　Yet hath your heart no earnest preference known?Mephistopheles

　　With ladies one should ne'er presume to jest.

　　Martha

　　Ah! you mistake!

　　Mephistopheles

　　I'm sorry I'm so blind But this I know - that you are very kind(They pass on.)

　　Faust

　　Me, little angel, didst thou recognize, When in the garden first I came?Margaret

　　Did you not see it? I cast down my eyes.

　　Faust

　　Thou dost forgive my boldness, dost not blame The liberty I took that day,When thou from church didst lately wend thy way?Margaret

　　I was confused. So had it never been; No one of me could any evil say. Alas,thought I, he doubtless in thy mien, Something unmaidenly or bold hath seen?It seemed as if it struck him suddenly, Here's just a girl with whom one maymake free! Yet I must own that then I scarcely knew What in your favourhere began at once to plead; Yet I was angry with myself indeed, That I moreangry could not feel with you.

　　Faust

　　Sweet love!

　　Margaret

　　Just wait awhile!

　　(She gathers a star - flower and plucks off the leaves one after another.)Faust

　　A nosegay may that be?

　　Margaret

　　No! It is but a game.

　　Faust

　　How?

　　Margaret

　　Go, you'll laugh at me!

　　(She plucks off the leaves and murmurs to herself.)Faust

　　What murmurest thou?

　　Margaret (half aloud)

　　He loves me - loves me not.

　　Faust

　　Sweet angel, with thy face of heavenly bliss!

　　Margaret (continues)

　　He loves me - not - he loves me - not

　　(Plucking off the last leaf with fond joy.)

　　He loves me!

　　Faust

　　Yes!

　　And this flower - language, darling, let it be, A heavenly oracle! He loveththee! Know'st thou the meaning of, He loveth thee? (He seizes both herhands.)

　　Margaret

　　I tremble so!

　　Faust

　　Nay! Do not tremble, love! Let this hand - pressure, let this glance revealFeelings, all power of speech above; To give oneself up wholly and to feel Ajoy that must eternal prove! Eternal! - Yes, its end would be despair. No end!- It cannot end!

　　(Margaret presses his hand, extricates herself, and runs away. He stands amoment in thought and then follows her).

　　Martha (approaching)

　　Night's closing.

　　Mephistopheles

　　Yes, we'll presently away.

　　Martha

　　I would entreat you longer yet to stay; But 'tis a wicked place, just hereabout; It is as if the folk had nothing else to do, Nothing to think of too, Butgaping watch their neighbours, who goes in and out; And scandal's busy still,do whatsoe'er one may. And our young couple?

　　Mephistopheles

　　They have flown up there. The wanton butterflies!Martha

　　He seems to take to her.

　　Mephistopheles

　　And she to him. 'Tis of the world the way!

　　A Summer-House

　　(Margaret runs in, hides behind the door, holds the tip of her finger to her lip,and peeps through the crevice.)

　　Margaret

　　He comes!

　　Faust

　　Ah, little rogue, so thou Think'st to provoke me! I have caught thee now!(He kisses her.)

　　Margaret

　　(embracing him, and returning the kiss)

　　Dearest of men! I love thee from my heart!

　　(Mephistopheles knocks.)

　　Faust (stamping)

　　Who's there?

　　Mephistopheles

　　A friend!

　　Faust

　　A brute!

　　Mephistopheles

　　'Tis time to part.

　　Martha (comes)

　　Ay, it is late, good sir.

　　Faust

　　Mayn't I attend you, then?

　　Margaret

　　Oh no - my mother would - adieu, adieu!

　　Faust

　　And must I really then take leave of you? Farewell!Martha

　　Good - bye!

　　Margaret

　　Ere long to meet again! (Exeunt Faust and Mephistopheles.)Margaret

　　Good heavens! how all things far and near Must fill his mind, - a man like this!Abash'd before him I appear, And say to all things only, yes. Poor simplechild, I cannot see, What 'tis that he can find in me.(Exit.)

　　Forest And Cavern - Faust And Mephistopheles

　　Faust (alone)

　　Spirit sublime! Thou gav'st me, gav'st me all For which I prayed! Not vainlyhast thou turn'd To me thy countenance in flaming fire: Gavest me gloriousnature for my realm, And also power to feel her and enjoy; Not merely with acold and wondering glance, Thou dost permit me in her depths profound, Asin the bosom of a friend to gaze. Before me thou dost lead her living tribes,And dost in silent grove, in air and stream Teach me to know my kindred.And when roars The howling storm - blast through the groaning wood,Wrenching the giant pine, which in its fall Crashing sweeps down its neighbourtrunks and boughs, While hollow thunder from the hill resounds; Then thoudost lead me to some shelter'd cave, Dost there reveal me to myself, andshow Of my own bosom the mysterious depths. And when with soothingbeam, the moon's pale orb Full in my view climbs up the pathless sky, Fromcrag and dewy grove, the silvery forms Of by - gone ages hover, and assuageThe joy austere of contemplative thought.

　　Oh, that naught perfect is assign'd to man, I feel, alas! With this exalted joy,Which lifts me near and nearer to the gods, Thou gav'st me this companion,unto whom I needs must cling, though cold and insolent, He still degrades meto myself, and turns Thy glorious gifts to nothing, with a breath. He in mybosom with malicious zeal For that fair image fans a raging fire; From cravingto enjoyment thus I reel And in enjoyment languish for desire.(Mephistopheles enters.)

　　Mephistopheles

　　Of this lone life have you not your fill? How for so long can it have charms foryou? 'Tis well enough to try it if you will; But then away again to somethingnew!

　　Faust

　　Would you could better occupy your leisure, Than in disturbing thus my hoursof joy.

　　Mephistopheles

　　Well! Well! I'll leave you to yourself with pleasure, A serious tone you hardlydare employ. To part from one so crazy, harsh, and cross, Were not in truth agrievous loss. The live - long day, for you I toil and fret; Ne'er from hisworship's face a hint I get, What pleases him, or what to let alone.Faust

　　Ay truly! that is just the proper tone! He wearies me, and would with thanksbe paid!

　　Mephistopheles

　　Poor Son of Earth, without my aid, How would thy weary days have flown?Thee of thy foolish whims I've cured, Thy vain imaginations banished, And butfor me, be well assured, Thou from this sphere must soon have vanished. Inrocky hollows and in caverns drear, Why like an owl sit moping here?Wherefore from dripping stones and moss with ooze embued, Dost suck, likeany toad, thy food? A rare, sweet pastime. Verily! The doctor cleaveth still tothee.

　　Faust

　　Dost comprehend what bliss without alloy From this wild wand'ring in thedesert springs? Couldst thou but guess the new life - power it brings, Thouwouldst be fiend enough to envy me my joy.

　　Mephistopheles

　　What super - earthly ecstasy! at night, To lie in darkness on the dewy height,Embracing heaven and earth in rapture high, The soul dilating to a deity; Withprescient yearnings pierce the core of earth, Feel in your labouring breast thesix - days' birth, Enjoy, in proud delight what no one knows, While your love- rapture o'er creation flows, The earthly lost in beatific vision, And then thelofty intuition

　　(With a gesture.)

　　I need not tell you how - to close!

　　Faust

　　Fie on you!

　　Mephistopheles

　　This displeases you? "For shame!" You are forsooth entitled to exclaim; Weto chaste ears it seems must not pronounce What, nathless, the chaste heartcannot renounce. Well, to be brief, the joy as fit occasions rise, I grudge younot, of specious lies. But long this mood thou'lt not retain. Already thou'rtagain outworn, And should this last, thou wilt be torn By frenzy or remorseand pain. Enough of this! Thy true love dwells apart, And all to her seems flatand tame; Alone thine image fills her heart, She loves thee with an all -devouring flame. First came thy passion with o'erpowering rush, Likemountain torrent, swollen by the melted snow; Full in her heart didst pour thesudden gush, Now has thy brooklet ceased to flow. Instead of sitting thronedmidst forests wild, It would become so great a lord To comfort the enamour'dchild, And the young monkey for her love reward. To her the hours seemmiserably long; She from the window sees the clouds float by As o'er the loftycity - walls they fly, "If I a birdie were!" so runs her song, Half through thenight and all day long. Cheerful sometimes, more oft at heart full sore; Fairlyoutwept seem now her tears, Anon she tranquil is, or so appears, And love -sick evermore.

　　Faust

　　Snake! Serpent vile!

　　Mephistopheles (aside)

　　Good! If I catch thee with my guile!

　　Faust

　　Vile reprobate! go get thee hence; Forbear the lovely girl to name! Nor in myhalf - distracted sense, Kindle anew the smouldering flame!Mephistopheles

　　What wouldest thou! She thinks you've taken flight; It seems, she's partly inthe right.

　　Faust

　　I'm near her still - and should I distant rove, Her I can ne'er forget, ne'er loseher love; And all things touch'd by those sweet lips of hers, Even the veryHost, my envy stirs.

　　Mephistopheles

　　'Tis well! I oft have envied you indeed, The twin - pair that among the rosesfeed.

　　Faust

　　Pander, avaunt!

　　Mephistopheles

　　Go to! I laugh, the while you rail, The power which fashion'd youth and maid,Well understood the noble trade; So neither shall occasion fail. But hence! -A mighty grief I trow! Unto thy lov'd one's chamber thou And not to deathshouldst go.

　　Faust

　　What is to me heaven's joy within her arms? What though my life her bosomwarms! Do I not ever feel her woe? The outcast am I not, unhoused, unblest,Inhuman monster, without aim or rest, Who, like the greedy surge, from rockto rock, Sweeps down the dread abyss with desperate shock? While she,within her lowly cot, which graced The Alpine slope, beside the waters wild,Her homely cares in that small world embraced, Secluded lived, a simple,artless child. Was't not enough, in thy delirious whirl To blast the steadfastrocks; Her, and her peace as well, Must I, God - hated one, to ruin hurl!Dost claim this holocaust, remorseless Hell! Fiend, help me to cut short thehours of dread! Let what must happen, happen speedily! Her direful doom fallcrushing on my head, And into ruin let her plunge with me!Mephistopheles

　　Why how again it seethes and glows! Away, thou fool! Her torment ease!When such a head no issue sees, It pictures straight the final close. Long lifeto him who boldly dares! A devil's pluck thou'rt wont to show; As for a devilwho despairs, Nothing I find so mawkish here below.Margaret's Room

　　Margaret (alone at her spinning wheel)

　　My peace is gone, My heart is sore, I find it never, And nevermore!Where him I have not, Is the grave; and all The world to me Is turned to gall.My wilder'd brain Is overwrought; My feeble senses Are distraught.My peace is gone, My heart is sore, I find it never, And nevermore!For him from the window I gaze, at home; For him and him only Abroad Iroam.

　　His lofty step, His bearing high, The smile of his lip, The power of his eye,His witching words, Their tones of bliss, His hand's fond pressure And ah -his kiss! My peace is gone, My heart is sore, I find it never, And nevermore.My bosom aches To feel him near; Ah, could I clasp And fold him here!Kiss him and kiss him Again would I, And on his kisses I fain would die.Martha's Garden

　　Margaret and Faust

　　Margaret

　　Promise me, Henry!

　　Faust

　　What I can!

　　Margaret

　　How thy religion fares, I fain would hear. Thou art a good kind - hearted man,Only that way not well - disposed, I fear.

　　Faust

　　Forbear, my child! Thou feelest thee I love; My heart, my blood I'd give, mylove to prove, And none would of their faith or church bereave.Margaret

　　That's not enough, we must ourselves believe!

　　Faust

　　Must we?

　　Margaret

　　Ah, could I but thy soul inspire! Thou honourest not the sacraments, alas!Faust

　　I honour them.

　　Margaret

　　But yet without desire; 'Tis long since thou hast been either to shrift or mass.Dost thou believe in God?

　　Faust

　　My darling, who dares say, Yes, I in God believe? Question or priest or sage,and they Seem, in the answer you receive, To mock the questioner.Margaret

　　Then thou dost not believe?

　　Faust

　　Sweet one! my meaning do not misconceive! Him who dare name? And whoproclaim, Him I believe? Who that can feel, His heart can steel, To say: Ibelieve him not? The All - embracer, All - sustainer, Holds and sustains he notThee, me, himself? Lifts not the Heaven its dome above? Doth not the firm -set earth beneath us lie? And beaming tenderly with looks of love, Climb notthe everlasting stars on high? Do we not gaze into each other's eyes? Nature'simpenetrable agencies, Are they not thronging on thy heart and brain,Viewless, or visible to mortal ken, Around thee weaving their mysteriouschain? Fill thence thy heart, how large soe'er it be; And in the feeling whenthou utterly art blest, Then call it, what thou wilt, Call it Bliss! Heart! Love!God! I have no name for it! 'Tis feeling all; Name is but sound and smokeShrouding the glow of heaven.

　　Margaret

　　All this is doubtless good and fair; Almost the same the parson says, Only inslightly different phrase.

　　Faust

　　Beneath Heaven's sunshine, everywhere, This is the utterance of the humanheart; Each in his language doth the like impart; Then why not I in mine?Margaret

　　What thus I hear Sounds plausible, yet I'm not reconciled; There's somethingwrong about it; much I fear That thou art not a Christian.Faust

　　My sweet child!

　　Margaret

　　Alas! it long hath sorely troubled me, To see thee in such odious company.Faust

　　How so?

　　Margaret

　　The man who comes with thee, I hate, Yea, in my spirit's inmost depthsabhor; As his loath'd visage, in my life before, Naught to my heart e'er gave apang so great.

　　Faust

　　Him fear not, my sweet love!

　　Margaret

　　His presence chills my blood. Towards all beside I have a kindly mood; Yet,though I yearn to gaze on thee, I feel At sight of him strange horror o'er mesteal; That he's a villain my conviction's strong. May Heaven forgive me, if Ido him wrong!

　　Faust

　　Yet such strange fellows in the world must be!Margaret

　　I would not live with such an one as he. If for a moment he but enter here, Helooks around him with a mocking sneer, And malice ill - conceal'd; That hewith naught on earth can sympathize is clear Upon his brow 'tis legiblyrevealed, That to his heart no living soul is dear. So blest I feel, within thinearms, So warm and happy, - free from all alarms; And still my heart dothclose when he comes near.

　　Faust

　　Foreboding angel! check thy fear!

　　Margaret

　　It so o'ermasters me, that when, Or wheresoe'er, his step I hear, I almostthink, no more I love thee then. Besides, when he is near, I ne'er could pray.This eats into my heart; with thee The same, my Henry, it must be.Faust

　　This is antipathy!

　　Margaret

　　I must away.

　　Faust

　　For one brief hour then may I never rest, And heart to heart, and soul to soulbe pressed?

　　Margaret

　　Ah, if I slept alone! To - night The bolt I fain would leave undrawn for thee;But then my mother's sleep is light, Were we surprised by her, ah me! Uponthe spot I should be dead.

　　Faust

　　Dear angel! there's no cause for dread. Here is a little phial, - if she takeMixed in her drink three drops, 'twill steep Her nature in a deep and soothingsleep.

　　Margaret

　　What do I not for thy dear sake! To her it will not harmful prove?Faust

　　Should I advise it else, sweet love?

　　Margaret

　　I know not, dearest, when thy face I see, What doth my spirit to thy willconstrain; Already I have done so much for thee, That scarcely more to dodoth now remain.

　　(Exit.)

　　Mephistopheles (enters)

　　Mephistopheles

　　The monkey! Is she gone?

　　Faust

　　Again hast played the spy?

　　Mephistopheles

　　Of all that pass'd I'm well apprized, I heard the doctor catechised, And trusthe'll profit much thereby! Fain would the girls inquire indeed Touching theirlover's faith and creed, And whether pious in the good old way; They think, ifpliant there, us too he will obey.

　　Faust

　　Thou monster, does not see that this Pure soul, possessed by ardent love, Fullof the living faith, To her of bliss The only pledge, must holy anguish prove,Holding the man she loves, fore - doomed to endless death!Mephistopheles

　　Most sensual, supersensualist? The while A damsel leads thee by the nose!Faust

　　Of filth and fire abortion vile!

　　Mephistopheles

　　In physiognomy strange skill she shows; She in my presence feels she knowsnot how; My mask it seems a hidden sense reveals; That I'm a genius shemust needs allow, That I'm the very devil perhaps she feels. So then to - nightFaust

　　What's that to you?

　　Mephistopheles

　　I've my amusement in it too!

　　At The Well

　　Margaret and Bessy, with pitchers

　　Bessy

　　Of Barbara hast nothing heard?

　　Margaret

　　I rarely go from home, - no, not a word.

　　Bessy

　　'Tis true: Sybilla told me so to - day! That comes of being proud, methinks;She played the fool at last.

　　Margaret

　　How so?

　　Bessy

　　They say That two she feedeth when she eats and drinks.Margaret

　　Alas!

　　Bessy

　　She's rightly served, in sooth, How long she hung upon the youth! Whatpromenades, what jaunts there were, To dancing booth and village fair! Thefirst she everywhere must shine, He always treating her to pastry and to wineOf her good looks she was so vain, So shameless too, that to retain Hispresents, she did not disdain; Sweet words and kisses came anon And thenthe virgin flower was gone.

　　Margaret

　　Poor thing!

　　Bessy

　　Forsooth dost pity her? At night, when at our wheels we sat, Abroad ourmothers ne'er would let us stir. Then with her lover she must chat, Or on thebench or in the dusky walk, Thinking the hours too brief for their sweet talk;Her proud head she will have to bow, And in white sheet do penance now!Margaret

　　But he will surely marry her?

　　Bessy

　　Not he! He won't be such a fool! a gallant lad Like him, can roam o'er landand sea, Besides, he's off.

　　Margaret

　　That is not fair!

　　Bessy

　　If she should get him, 'twere almost as bad! Her myrtle wreath the boyswould tear; And then we girls would plagued her too, For we chopp'd strawbefore her door would strew!

　　(Exit.)

　　Margaret (walking towards home)

　　How stoutly once I could inveigh, If a poor maiden went astray; Not wordsenough my tongue could find, 'Gainst others' sin to speak my mind! Black as itseemed, I blacken'd it still more, And strove to make it blacker than before.And did myself securely bless Now my own trespass doth appear! Yet ah! -what urg'd me to transgress, God knows, it was so sweet, so dear!Zwinger

　　Enclosure between the City - wall and the Gate.(In the niche of the wall a devotional image of the Mater dolorosa, with flower- pots before it)

　　Margaret (putting fresh flowers in the pots)

　　Ah, rich in sorrow, thou, Stoop thy maternal brow, And mark with pitying eyemy misery! The sword in thy pierced heart, Thou dost with bitter smart, Gazeupwards on thy Son's death agony. To the dear God on high, Ascends thypiteous sigh, Pleading for his and thy sore misery. Ah, who can know Thetorturing woe, The pangs that rack me to the bone? How my poor heart,without relief, Trembles and throbs, its yearning grief Thou knowest, thoualone! Ah, wheresoe'er I go, With woe, with woe, with woe, My anguish'dbreast is aching! When all alone I creep, I weep, I weep, I weep, Alas! myheart is breaking! The flower-pots at my window Were wet with tears ofmine, The while I pluck'd these blossoms, At dawn to deck thy shrine! Whenearly in my chamber Shone bright the rising morn, I sat there on my pallet, Myheart with anguish torn. Help! from disgrace and death deliver me! Ah! rich insorrow, thou, Stoop thy maternal brow, And mark with pitying eye mymisery!

　　Night. Street Before Margaret's Door

　　Valentine (a soldier, Margaret's brother)

　　When seated 'mong the jovial crowd, Where merry comrades boasting loudEach named with pride his favourite lass, And in her honour drain'd his glass;Upon my elbows I would lean, With easy quiet view the scene, Nor give mytongue the rein until Each swaggering blade had talked his fill. Then smiling Imy beard would stroke, The while, with brimming glass, I spoke; "Each to histaste! - but to my mind, Where in the country will you find, A maid, as mydear Gretchen fair, Who with my sister can compare?" Cling! Clang! so rangthe jovial sound! Shouts of assent went circling round; Pride of her sex is she!- cried some; Then were the noisy boasters dumb.And now! - I could tear out my hair, Or dash my brains out in despair! Meevery scurvy knave may twit, With stinging jest and taunting sneer! Likeskulking debtor I must sit, And sweat each casual word to hear! And though Ismash'd them one and all, Yet them I could not liars call.Who comes this way? who's sneaking here? If I mistake not, two draw near.If he be one, have at him; - well I wot Alive he shall not leave this spot!Faust. Mephistopheles

　　Faust

　　How from yon sacristy, athwart the night, Its beams the ever - burning taperthrows, While ever waning, fades the glimmering light, As gathering darknessdoth around it close! So night - like gloom doth in my bosom reign.Mephistopheles

　　I'm like a tom - cat in a thievish vein, That up fire - ladders tall and steep, Andround the walls doth slyly creep; Virtuous withal, I feel, with, I confess, Atouch of thievish joy and wantonness. Thus through my limbs already burnsThe glorious Walpurgis night! After to - morrow it returns, Then why onewakes, one knows aright!

　　Faust

　　Meanwhile, the treasure I see glimmering there, Will it ascend into the openair?

　　Mephistopheles

　　Ere long thou wilt proceed with pleasure, To raise the casket with its treasure;I took a peep, therein are stored, Of lion - dollars a rich hoard.Faust

　　And not a trinket? not a ring? Wherewith my lovely girl to deck?Mephistopheles

　　I saw among them some such thing, A string of pearls to grace her neck.Faust

　　'Tis well! I'm always loath to go, Without some gift my love to show.Mephistopheles

　　Some pleasures gratis to enjoy, Should surely cause you no annoy. Whilebright with stars the heavens appear, I'll sing a masterpiece of art: A moralsong shall charm her ear, More surely to beguile her heart.(Sings to the guitar.)

　　Kathrina say, Why lingering stay At dawn of day Before your lover's door?Maiden, beware, Nor enter there, Lest forth you fare, A maiden never more.Maiden take heed! Reck well my rede! Is't done, the deed? Good night, youpoor, poor thing! The spoiler's lies, His arts despise, Nor yield your prize,Without the marriage ring!

　　Valentine (steps forward)

　　Whom are you luring here? I'll give it you! Accursed rat - catchers, yourstrains I'll end! First, to the devil the guitar I'll send! Then to the devil with thesinger too!

　　Mephistopheles

　　The poor guitar! 'tis done for now.

　　Valentine

　　Your skull shall follow next, I trow!

　　Mephistopheles (to Faust)

　　Doctor, stand fast! your strength collect! Be prompt, and do as I direct. Outwith your whisk, keep close, I pray, I'll parry! do you thrust away!Valentine

　　Then parry that!

　　Mephistopheles

　　Why not?

　　Valentine

　　That too!

　　Mephistopheles

　　With ease!

　　Valentine

　　The devil fights for you! Why how is this? my hand's already lamed!Mephistopheles (to Faust)

　　Thrust home!

　　Valentine (falls)

　　Alas!

　　Mephistopheles

　　There! Now the lubber's tamed! But quick, away! We must at once takewing; A cry of murder strikes upon the ear; With the police I know my courseto steer, But with the blood - ban 'tis another thing.Martha (at the window)

　　Without! without!

　　Margaret (at the window)

　　Quick, bring a light!

　　Martha (as above)

　　They rail and scuffle, scream and fight!

　　People

　　One lieth here already dead!

　　Martha (coming out)

　　Where are the murderers? are they fled?

　　Margaret (coming out)

　　Who lieth here?

　　People

　　Thy mother's son.

　　Margaret

　　Almighty God! I am undone!

　　Valentine

　　I'm dying - 'tis a soon - told tale, And sooner done the deed. Why, women,do ye howl and wail? To my last words give heed! (All gather round him.) MyGretchen see! still young art thou, Art not discreet enough, I trow, Thou dostthy matters ill; Let this in confidence be said: Since thou the path of shamedost tread, Tread it with right good will!

　　Margaret

　　My brother! God! what can this mean?

　　Valentine

　　Abstain, Nor dare God's holy name profane! What's done, alas, is done andpast! Matters will take their course at last; By stealth thou dost begin withone, Others will follow him anon; And when a dozen thee have known,Thou'lt common be to all the town. When infamy is newly born, In secret sheis brought to light, And the mysterious veil of night O'er head and ears isdrawn; The loathsome birth men fain would slay; But soon, full grown, shewaxes bold, And though not fairer to behold, With brazen front insults theday: The more abhorrent to the sight, The more she courts the day's purelight.

　　The time already I discern, When thee all honest folk will spurn, And shun thyhated form to meet, As when a corpse infects the street. Thy heart will sink inblank despair, When they shall look thee in the face! A golden chain no morethou'lt wear! Nor near the altar take in church thy place! In fair lace collarsimply dight Thou'lt dance no more with spirits light! In darksome cornersthou wilt bide, Where beggars vile and cripples hide, And e'en though Godthy crime forgive, On earth, a thing accursed, thou'lt live!Martha

　　Your parting soul to God commend! Your dying breath in slander will youspend?

　　Valentine

　　Could I but reach thy wither'd frame, Thou wretched beldame, void ofshame! Full measure I might hope to win Of pardon then for every sin.Margaret

　　Brother! what agonizing pain!

　　Valentine

　　I tell thee, from vain tears abstain! 'Twas thy dishonour pierced my heart, Thyfall the fatal death - stab gave. Through the death - sleep I now depart ToGod, a soldier true and brave. (dies.)

　　In The Cathedral

　　Service, Organ, and Anthem

　　Margaret amongst a number of people

　　Evil - Spirit behind Margaret

　　Evil - Spirit

　　How different, Gretchen, was it once with thee, When thou, still full ofinnocence, Here to the altar camest, And from the small and well - conn'dbook Didst lisp thy prayer, Half childish sport, Half God in thy young heart!Gretchen! What thoughts are thine? What deed of shame Lurks in thy sinfulheart? Is thy prayer utter'd for thy mother's soul, Who into long, long tormentslept through thee? Whose blood is on thy threshold? - And stirs there notalready 'neath thy heart Another quick'ning pulse, that even now Torturesitself and thee With its foreboding presence?

　　Margaret

　　Woe! Woe! Oh could I free me from the thoughts That hither, thither, crowdupon my brain, Against my will!

　　Chorus

　　Dies irae, dies illa, Solvet saeclum in favilla.(The organ sounds.)

　　Evil - Spirit

　　Grim horror seizes thee! The trumpet sounds! The graves are shaken! Andthy heart From ashy rest For torturing flames A new created, Trembles intolife!

　　Margaret

　　Would I were hence! It is as if the organ Choked my breath, As if the choirMelted my inmost heart!

　　Chorus

　　Judex ergo cum sedebit, Quidquid latet adparebit, Nil inultum remanebit.Margaret

　　I feel oppressed! The pillars of the wall Imprison me! The vaulted roofWeighs down upon me! - air!

　　Evil - Spirit

　　Wouldst hide thee? sin and shame Remain not hidden! Air! light! Woe's thee!Chorus

　　Quid sum miser tunc dicturus? Quem patronum rogaturus! Cum vix justus sitsecurus.

　　Evil - Spirit

　　The glorified their faces turn Away from thee! Shudder the pure to reachTheir hands to thee! Woe!

　　Chorus

　　Quid sum miser tunc dicturus

　　Margaret

　　Neighbour! your smelling bottle!

　　(She swoons away.)

　　Walpurgis - Night

　　Act four, scene one, "Walpurgis Night" theme from the opera "Faust" 1859,by Charles Gounod. Over the heather, marshes, meadows, Light as a feather,Eerie shadows, Airily flashing lower, higher, flaming and flashing, glowing fire,they float, they hover, below, above, In fields of clover, In wood and grove,Flames burning brightly, Rays blazing red, Souls drifting lightly, Souls of thedead.

　　The Hartz Mountains. District of Schierke and ElendFaust and Mephistopheles

　　Mephistopheles

　　A broomstick dost thou not at least desire? The roughest he - goat fain wouldI bestride, By this road from our goal we're still far wide.Faust

　　While fresh upon my legs, so long I naught require, Except this knotty staff.Beside, What boots it to abridge a pleasant way? Along the labyrinth of thesevales to creep, Then scale these rocks, whence, in eternal spray, Adown thecliffs the silvery fountains leap: Such is the joy that seasons paths like these!Spring weaves already in the birchen trees; E'en the late pine - grove feels herquickening powers; Should she not work within these limbs of ours?Mephistopheles

　　Naught of this genial influence do I know! Within me all is wintry. Frost andsnow I should prefer my dismal path to bound. How sadly, yonder, withbelated glow Rises the ruddy moon's imperfect round, Shedding so faint alight, at every tread One's sure to stumble 'gainst a rock or tree! An IgnisFatuus I must call instead. Yonder one burning merrily, I see. Holla! myfriend! may I request your light? Why should you flare away so uselessly? Bekind enough to show us up the height!

　　Ignis Fatuus

　　Through reverence, I hope I may subdue The lightness of my nature; true, Ourcourse is but a zigzag one.

　　Mephistopheles

　　Ho! ho!

　　So men, forsooth, he thinks to imitate! Now, in the devil's name, for once gostraight! Or out at once your flickering life I'll blow.Ignis Fatuus

　　That you are master here is obvious quite; To do your will, I'll cordially essay;Only reflect! The hill is magic - mad to - night; And if to show the path youchoose a meteor's light, You must not wonder should we go astray.Faust, Mephistopheles, Ignis Fatuus (in alternate song)Through the dream and magic - sphere, As it seems, we now are speeding;Honour win, us rightly leading, That betimes we may appear In yon wide anddesert region!

　　Trees on trees, a stalwart legion, Swiftly past us are retreating, And the cliffswith lowly greeting; Rocks long - snouted, row on row, How they snort, andhow they blow!

　　Through the stones and heather springing, Brook and brooklet haste below;Hark the rustling! Hark the singing! Hearken to love's plaintive lays; Voices ofthose heavenly days What we hope, and what we love! Like a tale of oldentime, Echo's voice prolongs the chime.

　　To - whit! To - whoo! It sounds more near; Plover, owl and jay appear, Allawake, around, above? Paunchy salamanders too Peer, long - limbed, thebushes through! And, like snakes, the roots of treesCoil themselves from rock and sand, Stretching many a wondrous band, Usto frighten, us to seize; From rude knots with life embued, Polyp - fangsabroad they spread, To snare the wanderer! 'Neath our tread, Mice, inmyriads, thousand - hued, Through the heath and through the moss! And thefire - flies' glittering throng, Wildering escort, whirls along, Here and there, ourpath across. Tell me, stand we motionless, Or still forward do we press? Allthings round us whirl and fly; Rocks and trees make strange grimaces,Dazzling meteors change their places, How they puff and multiply!Mephistopheles

　　Now grasp my doublet - we at last A central peak have reached, whichshows, If round a wondering glance we cast, How in the mountain Mammonglows,

　　Faust

　　How through the chasms strangely gleams, A lurid light, like dawn's red glow,Pervading with its quivering beams, The gorges of the gulf below! Herevapours rise, there clouds float by, Here through the mist the light doth shine;Now, like a fount, it bursts on high, Meanders now, a slender line; Farreaching, with a hundred veins, Here through the valley see it glide; Here,where its force the gorge restrains, At once it scatters, far and wide; Anear,like showers of golden sand Strewn broadcast, sputter sparks of light: Andmark yon rocky walls that stand Ablaze, in all their towering height!Mephistopheles

　　Doth not Sir Mammon for this fete Grandly illume his palace! Thou Art luckyto have seen it; now, The boisterous guests, I feel, are coming straight.Faust

　　How through the air the storm doth whirl! Upon my neck it strikes withsudden shock.

　　Mephistopheles

　　Cling to these ancient ribs of granite rock, Else to yon depths profound it youwill hurl. A murky vapour thickens night. Hark! Through the woods thetempests roar! The owlets flit in wild affright. Hark! Splinter'd are the columnsthat upbore The leafy palace, green for aye: The shivered branches whirr andsigh, Yawn the huge trunks with mighty groan. The roots upriven, creak andmoan! In fearful and entangled fall, One crashing ruin whelms them all, Whilethrough the desolate abyss, Sweeping the wreck - strewn precipice, Theraging storm - blasts howl and hiss! Aloft strange voices dost thou hear?Distant now and now more near? Hark! the mountain ridge along, Streametha raving magic - song!

　　Witches And Wizards Chorus - Visions And DancesWitches (in chorus)

　　Now to the Brocken the witches hie, The stubble is yellow, the corn is green;Thither the gathering legions fly, And sitting aloft is Sir Urian seen: O'er stickand o'er stone they go whirling along, Witches and he - goats, a motleythrong,

　　Voices

　　Alone old Baubo's coming now; She rides upon a farrow sow.Chorus

　　Honour to her, to whom honour is due! Forward, Dame Baubo! Honour toyou! A goodly sow and mother thereon, The whole witch chorus followsanon.

　　Voice

　　Which way didst come?

　　Voice

　　O'er Ilsenstein! There I peep'd in an owlet's nest. With her broad eye shegazed in mine!

　　Voice

　　Drive to the devil, thou hellish pest! Why ride so hard?Voice

　　She has graz'd my side, Look at the wounds, how deep and how wide!Witches (in chorus)

　　The way is broad, the way is long; What mad pursuit! What tumult wild!Scratches the besom and sticks the prong; Crush'd is the mother, and stifledthe child.

　　Wizards (half chorus)

　　Like house - encumber'd snail we creep; While far ahead the women keep,For when to the devil's house we speed, By a thousand steps they take thelead.

　　The Other Half

　　Not so, precisely do we view it; They with a thousand steps may do it; But letthem hasten as they can, With one long bound 'tis clear'd by man.Voices (above)

　　Come with us, come with us from Felsensee.

　　Voices (from below)

　　Aloft to you we would mount with glee! We wash, and free from all stain arewe, Yet barren evermore must be!

　　Both Choruses

　　The wind is hushed, the stars grow pale, The pensive moon her light doth veil;And whirling on, the magic choir Sputters forth sparks of drizzling fire.Voice (from below)

　　Stay! stay!

　　Voice (from above)

　　What voice of woe Calls from the cavern'd depths below?Voice (from below)

　　Take me with you! Oh take me too! Three centuries I climb in vain, And yetcan ne'er the summit gain! To be with my kindred I am fain.Both Choruses

　　Broom and pitch - fork, goat and prong, Mounted on these we whirl along;Who vainly strives to climb to - night, Is evermore a luckless wight!Demi - Witch (below)

　　I hobble after, many a day; Already the others are far away! No rest at homecan I obtain Here too my efforts are in vain!

　　Chorus of Witches

　　Salve gives the witches strength to rise; A rag for a sail does well enough; Agoodly ship is every trough; To - night who flies not, never flies.Both Choruses

　　And when the topmost peak we round, Then alight ye on the ground; Theheath's wide regions cover ye With your mad swarms of witchery!(They let themselves down.)

　　Mephistopleles

　　They crowd and jostle, whirl and flutter! They whisper, babble, twirl, andsplutter! They glimmer, sparkle, stink and flare A true witch - element!Beware! Stick close! else we shall severed be. Where art thou?Faust (in the distance)

　　Here!

　　Mephistopheles

　　Already, whirl'd so far away! The master then indeed I needs must play. Giveground! Squire Voland comes! Sweet folk, give ground! Here, doctor, graspme! With a single bound Let us escape this ceaseless jar; Even for me toomad these people are. Hard by there shineth something with peculiar glare,Yon brake allureth me; it is not far; Come, come along with me! we'll slip inthere.

　　Faust

　　Spirit of contradiction! Lead! I'll follow straight! 'Twas wisely done, however,to repair On May - night to the Brocken, and when there By our own choiceourselves to isolate!

　　Mephistopheles

　　Mark, of those flames the motley glare! A merry club assembles there. In asmall circle one is not alone.

　　Faust

　　I'd rather be above, though, I must own! Already fire and eddying smoke Iview; The impetuous millions to the devil ride; Full many a riddle will be thereuntied.

　　Mephistopheles

　　Ay! and full many a riddle tied anew. But let the great world rave and riot!Here will we house ourselves in quiet. A custom 'tis of ancient date, Ourlesser worlds within the great world to create! Young witches there I see,naked and bare, And old ones, veil'd more prudently. For my sake onlycourteous be! The trouble's small, the sport is rare. Of instruments I hear thecursed din One must get used to it. Come in! come in! There's now no helpfor it. I'll step before And introducing you as my good friend, Confer on youone obligation more. How say you now? 'Tis no such paltry room; Why onlylook, you scarce can see the end. A hundred fires in rows disperse the gloom;They dance, they talk, they cook, make love, and drink: Where could we findaught better, do you think?

　　Faust

　　To introduce us, do you purpose here As devil or as wizard to appear?Mephistopheles

　　Though I am wont indeed to strict incognito, Yet upon gala - days one mustone's orders show. No garter have I to distinguish me, Nathless the clovenfoot doth here give dignity. Seest thou yonder snail? Crawling this way shehies: With searching feelers, she, no doubt, Hath me already scented out;Here, even if I would, for me there's no disguise. From fire to fire, we'llsaunter at our leisure, The gallant you, I'll cater for your pleasure.(To a party seated round some expiring embers.)Old gentleman, apart, why sit ye moping here? Ye in the midst should be of allthis jovial cheer, Girt round with noise and youthful riot; At home one surelyhas enough of quiet.

　　General

　　In nations put his trust, who may, Whate'er for them one may have done; Forwith the people, as with women, they Honour your rising stars alone!Minister

　　Now all too far they wander from the right; I praise the good old ways, tothem I hold, Then was the genuine age of gold, When we ourselves wereforemost in men's sight.

　　Parvenu

　　Ne'er were we 'mong your dullards found, And what we ought not, that to dowere fair; Yet now are all things turning round and round, When on firm basiswe would them maintain.

　　Author

　　Who, as a rule, a treatise now would care To read, of even moderate sense?As for the rising generation, ne'er Has youth displayed such arrogantpretence.

　　Mephistopheles

　　(suddenly appearing very old)

　　Since for the last time I the Brocken scale, That folk are ripe for doomsday,now one sees; And just because my cask begins to fail, So the whole world isalso on the lees.

　　Huckster - Witch

　　Stop, gentlemen, nor pass me by, Of wares I have a choice collection: Prayhonour them with your inspection. Lose not his opportunity! Yet nothing in mybooth you'll find Without its counterpart on earth; there's naught, Which to theworld, and to mankind, Hath not some direful mischief wrought. No daggerhere, which hath not flow'd with blood, No chalice, whence, into somehealthy frame Hath not been poured hot poison's wasting flood. No trinket,but hath wrought some woman's shame, No weapon but hath cut somesacred tie, Or from behind hath stabb'd an enemy.Mephistopheles

　　Gossip! For wares like these the time's gone by, What's done is past! what'spast is done! With novelties your booth supply; Us novelties attract alone.Faust

　　May this wild scene my senses spare! This, may in truth be called a fair!Mephistopheles

　　Upward the eddying concourse throng; Thinking to push, thyself art push'dalong.

　　Faust

　　Who's that, pray?

　　Mephistopheles

　　Mark her well! That's Lilith.

　　Faust

　　Who?

　　Mephistopheles

　　Adam's first wife. Of her rich locks beware! That charm in which she'sparallel'd by few; When in its toils a youth she doth ensnare, He will not soonescape, I promise you.

　　Faust

　　There sit a pair, the old one with the young; Already they have bravelydanced and sprung!

　　Mephistopheles

　　Here there is no repose to - day. Another dance begins; we'll join it, comeaway!

　　Faust

　　(dancing with the young one)

　　Once a fair vision came to me; There in I saw an apple - tree, Two beauteousapples charmed mine eyes; I climb'd forthwith to reach the prize.The Fair One

　　Apples still fondly ye desire, From paradise it hath been so. Feelings of joymy breast inspire That such too in my garden grow.Mephistopheles (with the old one)

　　Once a weird vision came to me; Therein I saw a rifted tree. It had a . . . . . . ;But as it was it pleased me too.

　　The Old One

　　I beg most humbly to salute The gallant with the cloven foot! Let him a . . .have ready here, If he a . . . does not fear.

　　Proctophantasmist

　　Accursed mob! How dare ye thus to meet? Have I not shown anddemonstrated too, That ghosts stand not on ordinary feet? Yet here ye dance,as other mortals do!

　　The Fair One (dancing)

　　Then at our ball, what doth he here?

　　Faust (dancing)

　　Oh! He must everywhere appear. He must adjudge, when others dance; If oneach step his say's not said, So is that step as good as never made. He's mostannoyed, so soon as we advance; If ye would circle in one narrow round, Ashe in his old mill, then doubtless he Your dancing would approve, - especiallyIf ye forthwith salute him with respect profound!Proctophantasmist

　　Still here! what arrogance! unheard of quite! Vanish; we now have fill'd theworld with light! Laws are unheeded by the devil's host; Wise as we are, yetTegel hath its ghost! How long at this conceit I've swept with all my might,Lost is the labour: 'tis unheard of quite!

　　The Fair One

　　Cease here to teaze us any more, I pray.

　　Proctophantasmist

　　Spirits, I plainly to your face declare: No spiritual control myself will bear,Since my own spirit can exert no sway.

　　(The dancing continues.)

　　To - night, I see, I shall in naught succeed; But I'm prepar'd my travels topursue, And hope, before my final step indeed, To triumph over bards anddevils too.

　　Mephistopheles

　　Now in some puddle will he take his station, Such is his mode of seekingconsolation; Where leeches, feasting on his rump, will drain Spirits alike andspirit from his brain.

　　(To Faust, who has left the dance.)

　　But why the charming damsel leave, I pray, Who to you in the dance sosweetly sang?

　　Faust

　　Ah, in the very middle of her lay, Out of her mouth a small red mouse theresprang.

　　Mephistopheles

　　Suppose there did! One must not be too nice. 'Twas well it was not grey, letthat suffice. Who 'mid his pleasures for a trifle cares?Faust

　　Then saw I

　　Mephistopheles

　　What?

　　Faust

　　Mephisto, seest thou there Standing far off, a lone child, pale and fair? Slowfrom the spot her drooping form she tears, And seems with shackled feet tomove along; I own, within me the delusion' strong, That she the likeness of myGretchen wears.

　　Mephistopheles

　　Gaze not upon her! 'Tis not good! Forbear! 'Tis lifeless, magical, a shape ofair, An idol. Such to meet with, bodes no good; That rigid look of hers dothfreeze man's blood, And well - nigh petrifies his heart to stone: The story ofMedusa thou hast known.

　　Faust

　　Ay, verily! a corpse's eyes are those, Which there was no fond loving hand toclose. That is the bosom I so fondly press'd, That my sweet Gretchen's form,so oft caress'd!

　　Mephistopheles

　　Deluded fool! 'Tis magic, I declare! To each she doth his lov'd one's imagewear.

　　Faust

　　What bliss! what torture! vainly I essay To turn me from that piteous lookaway. How strangely doth a single crimson line Around that lovely neck itscoil entwine, It shows no broader than a knife's blunt edge!Mephistopheles

　　Quite right. I see it also, and allege That she beneath her arm her head canbear, Since Perseus cut it off. - But you I swear Are craving for illusion still!Come then, ascend yon little hill! As on the Prater all is gay, And if my sensesare not gone, I see a theatre, - what's going on?Servibilis

　　They are about to recommence; - the play Will be the last of seven, and spick- span new 'Tis usual here that number to present. A dilettante did the pieceinvent, And dilettanti will enact it too. Excuse me, gentlemen; to me's assign'dAs dilettante to uplift the curtain.

　　Mephistopheles

　　You on the Blocksberg I'm rejoiced to find, That 'tis your most appropriatesphere is certain.

　　Walpurgis - Night's Dream Or Oberon And Titania's Golden Wedding-FeastIntermezzo

　　The Theatre

　　Manager

　　Vales, where mists still shift and play, To ancient hills succeeding, These ourscenes; - so we, to - day, May rest, brave sons of Mieding.Herald

　　That the marriage golden be, Must fifty years be ended; More dear this feastof gold to me, Contention now suspended.

　　Oberon

　　Spirits, if present, grace the scene. And if with me united, Then gratulate theking and queen, Their troth thus newly plighted!Puck

　　Puck draws near and wheels about, In mazy circles dancing! Hundreds swellhis joyous shout, Behind him still advancing.

　　Ariel

　　Ariel wakes his dainty air, His lyre celestial stringing. Fools he lureth, and thefair, With his celestial singing.

　　Oberon

　　Wedded ones, would ye agree, We court your imitation: Would ye fondlylove as we, We counsel separation.

　　Titania

　　If husband scold and wife retort, Then bear them far asunder; Her to theburning south transport, And him the North Pole under.The Whole Orchestra (fortissimo)

　　Flies and midges all unite With frog and chirping cricket, Our orchestrathroughout the night, Resounding in the thicket!(Solo)

　　Yonder doth the bagpipe come! Its sack an airy bubble. Schnick, schnick,schnack, with nasal hum, Its notes it doth redouble.Embryo Spirit

　　Spider's foot and midge's wing, A toad in form and feature; Together verses itcan string, Though scarce a living creature.

　　A Little Pair

　　Tiny step and lofty bound, Through dew and exhalation; Ye trip it deftly onthe ground, But gain no elevation.

　　Inquisitive Traveller

　　Can I indeed believe my eyes? Is't not mere masquerading? What! Oberon inbeauteous guise, Among the groups parading!

　　Orthodox

　　No claws, no tail to whisk about, To fright us at our revel; Yet like the godsof Greece, no doubt, He too's a genuine devil.Northern Artist

　　These that I'm hitting off to - day Are sketches unpretending; Towards Italywithout delay, My steps I think of bending.

　　Purist

　　Alas! ill - fortune leads me here, Where riot still grows louder; And 'mong thewitches gather'd here But two alone wear powder!Young Witch

　　Your powder and your petticoat, Suit hags, there's no gainsaying; Hence I sitfearless on my goat, My naked charms displaying.Matron

　　We're too well - bred to squabble here, Or insult back to render; But mayyou wither soon, my dear, Although so young and tender.Leader of the Band

　　Nose of fly and gnat's proboscis, Throng not the naked beauty! Frogs andcrickets in the mosses, Keep time and do your duty!Weathercock (towards one side)

　　What charming company I view Together here collected! Gay bachelors, ahopeful crew. And brides so unaffected!

　　Weathercock (towards the other side)

　　Unless indeed the yawning ground Should open to receive them, From thisvile crew, with sudden bound, To Hell I'd jump and leave them.Xenien

　　With small sharp shears, in insect guise Behold us at your revel! That we maytender, filial - wise, Our homage to the devil.Hennings

　　Look now at yonder eager crew, How naively they're jesting! That they havetender hearts and true, They stoutly keep protesting!Musaget

　　Oneself amid this witchery How pleasantly one loses; For witches easier areto me To govern than the Muses!

　　Ci - devant Genius of the Age

　　With proper folks when we appear, No one can then surpass us! Keep close,wide is the Blocksberg here As Germany's Parnassus.Inquisitive Traveller

　　How name ye that stiff formal man, Who strides with lofty paces? He tracksthe game where'er he can, "He scents the Jesuits' traces."Crane

　　Where waters troubled are or clear, To fish I am delighted; Thus piousgentlemen appear With devils here united.

　　Worldling

　　By pious people, it is true, No medium is rejected; Conventicles, and not afew, On Blocksberg are erected.

　　Dancer

　　Another chorus now succeeds, Far off the drums are beating. Be still! Thebitterns 'mong the reeds Their one note are repeating.Dancing Master

　　Each twirls about and never stops, And as he can he fareth. The crookedleaps, the clumsy hops, Nor for appearance careth.Fiddler

　　To take each other's life, I trow, Would cordially delight them! As Orpheus'lyre the beasts, so now The bagpipe doth unite them.Dogmatist

　　My views, in spite of doubt and sneer, I hold with stout persistence, Inferringfrom the devils here, The evil one's existence.Idealist

　　My every sense rules Phantasy With sway quite too potential; Sure I'mdemented if the I Alone is the essential.

　　Realist

　　This entity's a dreadful bore, And cannot choose but vex me; The groundbeneath me ne'er before Thus totter'd to perplex me.Supernaturalist

　　Well pleased assembled here I view Of spirits this profusion; From devils,touching angels too, I gather some conclusion.Sceptic

　　The ignis fatuus they track out, And think they're near the treasure. Devilalliterates with doubt, Here I abide with pleasure.Leader of the Band

　　Frog and cricket in the mosses, Confound your gasconading! Nose of fly andgnat's proboscis; Most tuneful serenading!

　　The Knowing Ones

　　Sans - souci, so this host we greet, Their jovial humour showing; There's nowno walking on our feet, So on our heads we're going.The Awkward Ones

　　In seasons past we snatch'd, 'tis true, Some tit - bits by our cunning; Ourshoes, alas, are now danced through, On our bare soles we're running.Will - o' - the - Wisps

　　From marshy bogs we sprang to light, Yet here behold us dancing; The gayestgallants of the night, In glitt'ring rows advancing.Shooting Star

　　With rapid motion from on high, I shot in starry splendour; Now prostrate onthe grass I lie; Who aid will kindly render?

　　The Massive Ones

　　Room! wheel round! They're coming lo! Down sink the bending grasses.Though spirits, yet their limbs, we know, Are huge substantial masses.Puck

　　Don't stamp so heavily, I pray; Like elephants you're treading! And 'mong theelves be Puck to - day, The stoutest at the wedding!Ariel

　　If nature boon, or subtle sprite, Endow your soul with pinions; Then follow toyon rosy height, Through ether's calm dominions!Orchestra (pianissimo)

　　Drifting cloud and misty wreathes Are fill'd with light elysian; O'er reed andleaf the zephyr breathes So fades the fairy vision!A Gloomy Day. A Plain

　　Faust and Mephistopheles

　　Faust

　　In misery! despairing! long wandering pitifully on the face of the earth andnow imprisoned! This gentle hapless creature, immured in the dungeon as amalefactor and reserved for horrid tortures! That it should come to this! Tothis! - Perfidious, worthless spirit, and this thou hast concealed from me!Stand! ay, stand! roll in malicious rage thy fiendish eyes! Stand and brave mewith thine insupportable presence! Imprisoned! In hopeless misery! Deliveredover to the power of evil spirits and the judgment of unpitying humanity! Andme, the while, thou wert lulling with tasteless dissipations, concealing from meher growing anguish, and leaving her to perish without help!Mephistopheles

　　She is not the first.

　　Faust

　　Hound! Execrable monster! - Back with him, oh thou infinite spirit! back withthe reptile into his dog's shape, in which it was his wont to scamper before meat eventide, to roll before the feet of the harmless wanderer, and to fasten onhis shoulders when he fell! Change him again into his favourite shape, that hemay crouch on his belly before me in the dust, whilst I spurn him with my foot,the reprobate! - Not the first! - Woe! Woe! By no human soul is itconceivable, that more than one human creature has ever sunk into a depth ofwretchedness like this, or that the first in her writhing death agony should nothave atoned in the sight of all - pardoning Heaven for the guilt of all the rest!The misery of this one pierces me to the very marrow, and harrows up mysoul; thou art grinning calmly over the doom of thousands!Mephistopheles

　　Now we are once again at our wit's end, just where the reason of you mortalssnaps! Why dost thou seek our fellowship, if thou canst not go through withit? Wilt fly, and art not proof against dizziness? Did we force ourselves onthee, or thou on us?

　　Faust

　　Cease thus to gnash thy ravenous fangs at me! I loathe thee! - Great andglorious spirit, thou who didst vouchsafe to reveal thyself unto me, thou whodost know my very heart and soul, why hast thou linked me with this baseassociate, who feeds on mischief and revels in destruction?Mephistopheles

　　Hast done?

　　Faust

　　Save her! - or woe to thee! The direst of curses on thee for thousands ofyears!

　　Mephistopheles

　　I cannot loose the bands of the avenger, nor withdraw his bolts. - Save her! -Who was it plunged her into perdition? I or thou?(Faust looks wildly around.)

　　Mephistopheles

　　Would'st grasp the thunder? Well for you, poor mortals, that 'tis not yours towield! To smite to atoms the being however innocent, who obstructs his path,such is the tyrant's fashion of relieving himself in difficulties!Faust

　　Convey me thither! She shall be free!

　　Mephistopheles

　　And the danger to which thou dost expose thyself? Know, the guilt of blood,shed by thy hand, lies yet upon the town. Over the place where fell themurdered one, avenging spirits hover and watch for the returning murderer.Faust

　　This too from thee? The death and downfall of a world be on thee, monster!Conduct me thither, I say, and set her free!

　　Mephistopheles

　　I will conduct thee. And what I can do, - hear! Have I all power in heavenand upon earth! I'll cloud the senses of the warder, - do thou possess thyselfof the keys and lead her forth with human hand! I will keep watch! The magicsteeds are waiting, I bear thee off. Thus much is in my power.Faust

　　Up and away!

　　Night. Open Country

　　Faust. Mephistopheles

　　(Rushing along on black horses)

　　Faust

　　What weave they yonder round the Ravenstone?

　　Mephistopheles

　　I know not what they shape and brew.

　　Faust

　　They're soaring, swooping, bending, stooping.

　　Mephistopheles

　　A witche's pack.

　　Faust

　　They charm, they strew.

　　Mephistopheles

　　On! On!

　　Dungeon

　　Faust

　　(with a bunch of keys and a lamp before a small iron door)A fear unwonted o'er my spirit falls; Man's concentrated woe o'erwhelms mehere! She dwells immur'd within these dripping walls; Her only trespass adelusion dear! Thou lingerest at the fatal door, Thou dread'st to see her faceonce more? On! While thou dalliest, draws her death - hour near.(He seizes the lock. Singing within.)

　　My mother, the harlot, She took me and slew! My father, the scoundrel, Hatheaten me too! My sweet little sister Hath all my bones laid, Where softbreezes whisper All in the cool shade!

　　Then became I a wood - bird, and sang on the spray, Fly away! little bird, flyaway! fly away!

　　Faust (opening the lock)

　　Ah! she forebodes not that her lover's near, The clanking chains, the rustlingstraw, to hear.

　　(He enters.)

　　Dungeon Scene: Dungeon scene with Mephistopheles, Faust, and Margaret.Lithograph by Eugene Delacroix.]

　　Margaret

　　(hiding her face in the bed of straw)

　　Woe! woe! they come! on bitter 'tis to die!

　　Faust (softly)

　　Hush! hush! be still! I come to set thee free!Margaret

　　(throwing herself at his feet)

　　If thou art human, feel my misery!

　　Faust

　　Thou wilt awake the jailor with thy cry!

　　(He grasps the chains to unlock them.)

　　Margaret (on her knees)

　　Who, headsman, unto thee this power O'er me could give? Thou com'st forme at midnight - hour. Be merciful, and let me live! Is morrow's dawn not timeenough? (She stands up.)

　　I'm still so young, so young And must so early die! Fair was I too, and thatwas my undoing. My love is now afar, he then was nigh; Torn lies the garland,the fair blossoms strew'd. Nay, seize me not with hand so rude! Spare me!What harm have I e'er done to thee? Oh let me not in vain implore! I ne'erhave seen thee in my life before!

　　Faust

　　Can I endure this bitter agony?

　　Margaret

　　I now am at thy mercy quite. Let me my babe but suckle once again! Ifondled it the live - long night; They took it from me but to give me pain, Andnow, they say that I my child have slain. Gladness I ne'er again shall know.Then they sing songs about me, - 'tis wicked of the throng An ancient balladendeth so; Who bade them thus apply the song?

　　Faust

　　(throwing himself on the ground)

　　A lover at thy feet bends low, To loose the bonds of wretchedness and woe.Margaret

　　(throws herself beside him)

　　Oh, let us kneel and move the saints by prayer! Look! look! yon stairs below,Under the threshold there, Hell's flames are all aglow! Beneath the floor, Withhideous noise, The devils roar!

　　Faust (aloud)

　　Gretchen! Gretchen!

　　Margaret (listening)

　　That was my lov'd one's voice!

　　(She springs up, the chains fall off.)

　　Where is he? I heard him calling me. Free am I! There's none shall hinder me.To his neck will I fly, On his bosom will lie! Gretchen, he called! - On yonthreshold he stood; Amidst all the howling of hell's fiery flood, The scoff andthe scorn of its devilish crew, The tones of his voice, sweet and loving, Iknew.

　　Faust

　　'Tis I!

　　Margaret

　　'Tis thou! O say so once again!

　　(embracing him.)

　　'Tis he! 'Tis he! where's now the torturing pain? Where are the fetters? wherethe dungeon's gloom? 'Tis thou! To save me thou art come! And I am sav'd!Already now the street I see Where the first time I caught a glimpse of thee.There too the pleasant garden shade, Where I and Martha for thy comingstay'd.

　　Faust

　　(endeavouring to lead her away)

　　Come! come away!

　　Margaret

　　Oh do not haste!

　　I love to linger where thou stayest. (caressing him.)Faust

　　Ah haste! For if thou still delayest, Our lingering we shall both deplore.Margaret

　　How, dearest? canst thou kiss no more! So short a time away from me, andyet, To kiss thou couldst so soon forget! Why on thy neck so anxious do Ifeel When formerly a perfect heaven of bliss From thy dear looks and wordswould o'er me steal? As thou wouldst stifle me thou then didst kiss! Kiss me!Or I'll kiss thee! (She embraces him.) Woe! woe! Thy lips are cold, Aredumb! Thy love where hast thou left? Who hath me of thy love bereft?(She turns away from him.)

　　Faust

　　Come! Follow me, my dearest love, be bold! I'll cherish thee with ardourthousand - fold; I but entreat thee now to follow me!Margaret

　　(turning towards him)

　　And art thou he? and art thou really he?

　　Faust

　　'Tis I! O come!

　　Margaret

　　Thou wilt strike off my chain, And thou wilt take me to thine arms again. Howcomes it that thou dost not shrink from me? And dost thou know, love, whomthou wouldst set free?

　　Faust

　　Come! come! already night begins to wane.

　　Margaret

　　I sent my mother to her grave, I drown'd my child beneath the wave. Was itnot given to thee and me - thee too? 'Tis thou thyself! I scarce believe it yet.Give me thy hand! It is no dream! 'Tis true! Thine own dear hand! - But howis this? 'Tis wet? Quick, wipe it off! Meseems that yet There's blood thereon.Ah God! what hast thou done? Put up thy sword, I beg of thee!Faust

　　Oh, dearest, let the past forgotten be! Death is in every word.Margaret

　　No, thou must linger here in sorrow! The graves I will describe to thee, Andthou to them must see To - morrow: The best place give to my mother, Closeat her side my brother, Me at some distance lay But not too far away! Andthe little one place on my right breast, Nobody else will near me lie! To nestlebeside thee so lovingly, That was a rapture, gracious and sweet! A rapture Inever again shall prove; Methinks I would force myself on thee, love, Andthou dost spurn me, and back retreat Yet 'tis thyself, thy fond kind looks Isee.

　　Faust

　　If thou dost feel 'tis I, then come with me!

　　Margaret

　　What, there? without?

　　Faust

　　Yes, forth in the free air.

　　Margaret

　　Ay, if the grave's without, - If death lurk there! Hence to the everlastingresting - place, And not one step beyond! - Thou'rt leaving me? Oh Henry!would that I could go with thee!

　　Faust

　　Thou canst! But will it! Open stands the door.Margaret

　　I dare not go! I've naught to hope for more. What boots it to escape? Theylurk for me! 'Tis wretched to beg, as I must do, And with an evil consciencethereto! 'Tis wretched, in foreign lands to stray; And me they will catch, dowhat I may!

　　Faust

　　With thee will I abide.

　　Margaret

　　Quick! Quick! Save thy poor child! Keep to the path The brook along, Overthe bridge To the wood beyond, To the left, where the plank is, In the pond.Seize it at once! It fain would rise, It struggles still! Save it. Oh save!Faust

　　Dear Gretchen, more collected be! One little step, and thou art free!Margaret

　　Were we but only past the hill! There sits my mother upon a stone My brain,alas, is cold with dread! There sits my mother upon a stone, And to and froshe shakes her head; She winks not, she nods not, her head it droops sore;She slept so long, she waked no more; She slept, that we might taste of bliss:Ah! those were happy times, I wis!

　　Faust

　　Since here avails nor argument nor prayer, Thee hence by force I needs mustbear.

　　Margaret

　　Loose me! I will not suffer violence! With murderous hand hold not so fast! Ihave done all to please thee in the past!

　　Faust

　　Day dawns! My love! My love!

　　Margaret

　　Yes! day draws near. The day of judgment too will soon appear! It shouldhave been my bridal! No one tell, That thy poor Gretchen thou hast knowntoo well. Woe to my garland! Its bloom is o'er! Though not at the dance Weshall meet once more. The crowd doth gather, in silence it rolls; The squares,the streets, Scarce hold the throng. The staff is broken, - the death - bell tolls,They bind and seize me! I'm hurried along, To the seat of blood already I'mbound! Quivers each neck as the naked steel Quivers on mine the blow todeal The silence of the grave now broods around!Faust

　　Would I had ne'er been born!

　　Mephistopheles (appears without)

　　Up! or you're lost. Vain hesitation! Babbling, quaking! My steeds areshivering, Morn is breaking.

　　Margaret

　　What from the floor ascendeth like a ghost? 'Tis he! 'Tis he! Him from mypresence chase! What would he in this holy place? It is for me he cometh!Faust

　　Thou shalt live!

　　Margaret

　　Judgment of God! To thee my soul I give!

　　Mephistopheles (to Faust)

　　Come, come! With her I'll else abandon thee!

　　Margaret

　　Father, I'm thine! Do thou deliver me! Ye angels! Ye angelic hosts! descend,Encamp around to guard me and defend! Henry! I shudder now to look onthee!

　　Mephistopheles

　　She now is judged!

　　Voices (from above)

　　Is saved!

　　Mephistopheles (to Faust)

　　Come thou with me!

　　(Vanishes with Faust.)

　　Voice (from within, dying away)

　　Henry! Henry!

　　The End