　　The Sorrows of Young Werther

　　by J.W. von Goethe

　　Translated by Thomas Carlyle and R.D. Boylan

　　PREFACE

　　I have carefully collected whatever I have been able to learn ofthe story of poor Werther, and here present it to you, knowingthat you will thank me for it.  To his spirit and character youcannot refuse your admiration and love: to his fate you will notdeny your tears.

　　And thou, good soul, who sufferest the same distress as he enduredonce, draw comfort from his sorrows; and let this little book bethy friend, if, owing to fortune or through thine own fault, thoucanst not find a dearer companion.

　　BOOK I

　　MAY 4.

　　How happy I am that I am gone!  My dear friend, what a thing isthe heart of man!  To leave you, from whom I have been inseparable,whom I love so dearly, and yet to feel happy!  I know you willforgive me.  Have not other attachments been specially appointedby fate to torment a head like mine?  Poor Leonora! and yet I wasnot to blame.  Was it my fault, that, whilst the peculiar charmsof her sister afforded me an agreeable entertainment, a passionfor me was engendered in her feeble heart?  And yet am I whollyblameless?  Did I not encourage her emotions?  Did I not feelcharmed at those truly genuine expressions of nature, which, thoughbut little mirthful in reality, so often amused us?  Did I not --but oh! what is man, that he dares so to accuse himself?  My dearfriend I promise you I will improve; I will no longer, as has everbeen my habit, continue to ruminate on every petty vexation whichfortune may dispense; I will enjoy the present, and the past shallbe for me the past.  No doubt you are right, my best of friends,there would be far less suffering amongst mankind, if men -- andGod knows why they are so fashioned -- did not employ theirimaginations so assiduously in recalling the memory of past sorrow,instead of bearing their present lot with equanimity.  Be kindenough to inform my mother that I shall attend to her business tothe best of my ability, and shall give her the earliest informationabout it.  I have seen my aunt, and find that she is very far frombeing the disagreeable person our friends allege her to be.  Sheis a lively, cheerful woman, with the best of hearts.  I explainedto her my mother's wrongs with regard to that part of her portionwhich has been withheld from her.  She told me the motives andreasons of her own conduct, and the terms on which she is willingto give up the whole, and to do more than we have asked.  In short,I cannot write further upon this subject at present; only assuremy mother that all will go on well.  And I have again observed,my dear friend, in this trifling affair, that misunderstandingsand neglect occasion more mischief in the world than even maliceand wickedness.  At all events, the two latter are of less frequentoccurrence.

　　In other respects I am very well off here.  Solitude in thisterrestrial paradise is a genial balm to my mind, and the youngspring cheers with its bounteous promises my oftentimes misgivingheart.  Every tree, every bush, is full of flowers; and one mightwish himself transformed into a butterfly, to float about in thisocean of perfume, and find his whole existence in it.

　　The town itself is disagreeable; but then, all around, you find aninexpressible beauty of nature.  This induced the late Count M tolay out a garden on one of the sloping hills which here intersecteach other with the most charming variety, and form the most lovelyvalleys.  The garden is simple; and it is easy to perceive, evenupon your first entrance, that the plan was not designed by ascientific gardener, but by a man who wished to give himself uphere to the enjoyment of his own sensitive heart.  Many a tearhave I already shed to the memory of its departed master in asummer-house which is now reduced to ruins, but was his favouriteresort, and now is mine.  I shall soon be master of the place.The gardener has become attached to me within the last few days,and he will lose nothing thereby.

　　MAY 10.

　　A wonderful serenity has taken possession of my entire soul, likethese sweet mornings of spring which I enjoy with my whole heart.I am alone, and feel the charm of existence in this spot, whichwas created for the bliss of souls like mine.  I am so happy, mydear friend, so absorbed in the exquisite sense of mere tranquilexistence, that I neglect my talents.  I should be incapable ofdrawing a single stroke at the present moment; and yet I feel thatI never was a greater artist than now.  When, while the lovely valleyteems with vapour around me, and the meridian sun strikes the uppersurface of the impenetrable foliage of my trees, and but a few straygleams steal into the inner sanctuary, I throw myself down among thetall grass by the trickling stream; and, as I lie close to the earth,a thousand unknown plants are noticed by me: when I hear the buzz ofthe little world among the stalks, and grow familiar with the countlessindescribable forms of the insects and flies, then I feel the presenceof the Almighty, who formed us in his own image, and the breath ofthat universal love which bears and sustains us, as it floats aroundus in an eternity of bliss; and then, my friend, when darkness overspreadsmy eyes, and heaven and earth seem to dwell in my soul and absorb itspower, like the form of a beloved mistress, then I often think withlonging, Oh, would I could describe these conceptions, could impressupon paper all that is living so full and warm within me, that it mightbe the mirror of my soul, as my soul is the mirror of the infiniteGod!  O my friend -- but it is too much for my strength -- I sinkunder the weight of the splendour of these visions!

　　MAY 12.

　　I know not whether some deceitful spirits haunt this spot, orwhether it be the warm, celestial fancy in my own heart whichmakes everything around me seem like paradise.  In front of thehouse is a fountain, -- a fountain to which I am bound by a charmlike Melusina and her sisters.  Descending a gentle slope, you cometo an arch, where, some twenty steps lower down, water of theclearest crystal gushes from the marble rock.  The narrow wall whichencloses it above, the tall trees which encircle the spot, and thecoolness of the place itself, -- everything imparts a pleasant butsublime impression.  Not a day passes on which I do not spend anhour there.  The young maidens come from the town to fetch water,-- innocent and necessary employment, and formerly the occupation ofthe daughters of kings.  As I take my rest there, the idea of the oldpatriarchal life is awakened around me.  I see them, our old ancestors,how they formed their friendships and contracted alliances at thefountain-side; and I feel how fountains and streams were guarded bybeneficent spirits.  He who is a stranger to these sensations hasnever really enjoyed cool repose at the side of a fountain after thefatigue of a weary summer day.

　　MAY 13.

　　You ask if you shall send me books.  My dear friend, I beseech you,for the love of God, relieve me from such a yoke!  I need no moreto be guided, agitated, heated.  My heart ferments sufficiently ofitself.  I want strains to lull me, and I find them to perfectionin my Homer.  Often do I strive to allay the burning fever of myblood; and you have never witnessed anything so unsteady, souncertain, as my heart.  But need I confess this to you, my dearfriend, who have so often endured the anguish of witnessing mysudden transitions from sorrow to immoderate joy, and from sweetmelancholy to violent passions?  I treat my poor heart like a sickchild, and gratify its every fancy.  Do not mention this again:there are people who would censure me for it.

　　MAY 15.

　　The common people of the place know me already, and love me,particularly the children.  When at first I associated with them,and inquired in a friendly tone about their various trifles, somefancied that I wished to ridicule them, and turned from me inexceeding ill-humour.  I did not allow that circumstance to grieveme: I only felt most keenly what I have often before observed.Persons who can claim a certain rank keep themselves coldly alooffrom the common people, as though they feared to lose their importanceby the contact; whilst wanton idlers, and such as are prone to badjoking, affect to descend to their level, only to make the poorpeople feel their impertinence all the more keenly.

　　I know very well that we are not all equal, nor can be so; but itis my opinion that he who avoids the common people, in order notto lose their respect, is as much to blame as a coward who hideshimself from his enemy because he fears defeat.

　　The other day I went to the fountain, and found a young servant-girl,who had set her pitcher on the lowest step, and looked around tosee if one of her companions was approaching to place it on herhead.  I ran down, and looked at her.  "Shall I help you, prettylass?" said I.  She blushed deeply.  "Oh, sir!" she exclaimed."No ceremony!" I replied.  She adjusted her head-gear, and Ihelped her.  She thanked me, and ascended the steps.

　　MAY 17.

　　I have made all sorts of acquaintances, but have as yet found nosociety.  I know not what attraction I possess for the people, somany of them like me, and attach themselves to me; and then I feelsorry when the road we pursue together goes only a short distance.If you inquire what the people are like here, I must answer, "Thesame as everywhere."  The human race is but a monotonous affair.Most of them labour the greater part of their time for meresubsistence; and the scanty portion of freedom which remains tothem so troubles them that they use every exertion to get rid ofit.  Oh, the destiny of man!

　　But they are a right good sort of people.  If I occasionally forgetmyself, and take part in the innocent pleasures which are not yetforbidden to the peasantry, and enjoy myself, for instance, withgenuine freedom and sincerity, round a well-covered table, orarrange an excursion or a dance opportunely, and so forth, allthis produces a good effect upon my disposition; only I must forgetthat there lie dormant within me so many other qualities whichmoulder uselessly, and which I am obliged to keep carefully concealed.Ah! this thought affects my spirits fearfully.  And yet to bemisunderstood is the fate of the like of us.

　　Alas, that the friend of my youth is gone!  Alas, that I ever knewher!  I might say to myself, "You are a dreamer to seek what isnot to be found here below."  But she has been mine.  I havepossessed that heart, that noble soul, in whose presence I seemedto be more than I really was, because I was all that I could be.Good heavens! did then a single power of my soul remain unexercised?In her presence could I not display, to its full extent, thatmysterious feeling with which my heart embraces nature?  Was notour intercourse a perpetual web of the finest emotions, of thekeenest wit, the varieties of which, even in their very eccentricity,bore the stamp of genius?  Alas! the few years by which she wasmy senior brought her to the grave before me.  Never can I forgether firm mind or her heavenly patience.

　　A few days ago I met a certain young V--, a frank, open fellow,with a most pleasing countenance.  He has just left the university,does not deem himself overwise, but believes he knows more thanother people.  He has worked hard, as I can perceive from manycircumstances, and, in short, possesses a large stock of information.When he heard that I am drawing a good deal, and that I know Greek(two wonderful things for this part of the country), he came tosee me, and displayed his whole store of learning, from Batteauxto Wood, from De Piles to Winkelmann: he assured me he had readthrough the first part of Sultzer's theory, and also possessed amanuscript of Heyne's work on the study of the antique.  I allowedit all to pass.

　　I have become acquainted, also, with a very worthy person, thedistrict judge, a frank and open-hearted man.  I am told it is amost delightful thing to see him in the midst of his children, ofwhom he has nine.  His eldest daughter especially is highly spokenof.  He has invited me to go and see him, and I intend to do soon the first opportunity.  He lives at one of the royal hunting-lodges,which can be reached from here in an hour and a half by walking,and which he obtained leave to inhabit after the loss of his wife,as it is so painful to him to reside in town and at the court.

　　There have also come in my way a few other originals of a questionablesort, who are in all respects undesirable, and most intolerablein their demonstration of friendship.  Good-bye.  This letter willplease you: it is quite historical.

　　MAY 22.

　　That the life of man is but a dream, many a man has surmisedheretofore; and I, too, am everywhere pursued by this feeling.When I consider the narrow limits within which our active andinquiring faculties are confined; when I see how all our energiesare wasted in providing for mere necessities, which again have nofurther end than to prolong a wretched existence; and then thatall our satisfaction concerning certain subjects of investigationends in nothing better than a passive resignation, whilst we amuseourselves painting our prison-walls with bright figures and brilliantlandscapes, -- when I consider all this, Wilhelm, I am silent.I examine my own being, and find there a world, but a world ratherof imagination and dim desires, than of distinctness and livingpower.  Then everything swims before my senses, and I smile anddream while pursuing my way through the world.

　　All learned professors and doctors are agreed that children do notcomprehend the cause of their desires; but that the grown-up shouldwander about this earth like children, without knowing whence theycome, or whither they go, influenced as little by fixed motives,but guided like them by biscuits, sugar-plums, and the rod, -- thisis what nobody is willing to acknowledge; and yet I think it ispalpable.

　　I know what you will say in reply; for I am ready to admit thatthey are happiest, who, like children, amuse themselves with theirplaythings, dress and undress their dolls, and attentively watchthe cupboard, where mamma has locked up her sweet things, and,when at last they get a delicious morsel, eat it greedily, andexclaim, "More!"  These are certainly happy beings; but othersalso are objects of envy, who dignify their paltry employments,and sometimes even their passions, with pompous titles, representingthem to mankind as gigantic achievements performed for their welfareand glory.  But the man who humbly acknowledges the vanity of allthis, who observes with what pleasure the thriving citizen convertshis little garden into a paradise, and how patiently even the poorman pursues his weary way under his burden, and how all wish equallyto behold the light of the sun a little longer, -- yes, such a manis at peace, and creates his own world within himself; and he isalso happy, because he is a man.  And then, however limited hissphere, he still preserves in his bosom the sweet feeling of liberty,and knows that he can quit his prison whenever he likes.

　　MAY 26.

　　You know of old my ways of settling anywhere, of selecting a littlecottage in some cosy spot, and of putting up in it with everyinconvenience.  Here, too, I have discovered such a snug, comfortableplace, which possesses peculiar charms for me.

　　About a league from the town is a place called Walheim.  (The readerneed not take the trouble to look for the place thus designated.We have found it necessary to change the names given in the original.)It is delightfully situated on the side of a hill; and, by proceedingalong one of the footpaths which lead out of the village, you canhave a view of the whole valley.  A good old woman lives there,who keeps a small inn.  She sells wine, beer, and coffee, and ischeerful and pleasant notwithstanding her age.  The chief charmof this spot consists in two linden-trees, spreading their enormousbranches over the little green before the church, which is entirelysurrounded by peasants' cottages, barns, and homesteads.  I haveseldom seen a place so retired and peaceable; and there often havemy table and chair brought out from the little inn, and drink mycoffee there, and read my Homer.  Accident brought me to the spotone fine afternoon, and I found it perfectly deserted.  Everybodywas in the fields except a little boy about four years of age, whowas sitting on the ground, and held between his knees a child aboutsix months old: he pressed it to his bosom with both arms, whichthus formed a sort of arm-chair; and, notwithstanding the livelinesswhich sparkled in its black eyes, it remained perfectly still.The sight charmed me.  I sat down upon a plough opposite, andsketched with great delight this little picture of brotherlytenderness.  I added the neighbouring hedge, the barn-door, andsome broken cart-wheels, just as they happened to lie; and I foundin about an hour that I had made a very correct and interestingdrawing, without putting in the slightest thing of my own.  Thisconfirmed me in my resolution of adhering, for the future, entirelyto nature.  She alone is inexhaustible, and capable of forming thegreatest masters.  Much may be alleged in favour of rules, as muchmay be likewise advanced in favour of the laws of society: anartist formed upon them will never produce anything absolutely bador disgusting; as a man who observes the laws, and obeys decorum,can never be an absolutely intolerable neighbour, nor a decidedvillain: but yet, say what you will of rules, they destroy thegenuine feeling of nature, as well as its true expression.  Do nottell me "that this is too hard, that they only restrain and prunesuperfluous branches, etc."  My good friend, I will illustratethis by an analogy.  These things resemble love.  A warmheartedyouth becomes strongly attached to a maiden: he spends every hourof the day in her company, wears out his health, and lavishes hisfortune, to afford continual proof that he is wholly devoted toher.  Then comes a man of the world, a man of place and respectability,and addresses him thus: "My good young friend, love is natural;but you must love within bounds.  Divide your time: devote a portionto business, and give the hours of recreation to your mistress.Calculate your fortune; and out of the superfluity you may makeher a present, only not too often, -- on her birthday, and suchoccasions."  Pursuing this advice, he may become a useful memberof society, and I should advise every prince to give him anappointment; but it is all up with his love, and with his geniusif he be an artist.  O my friend! why is it that the torrent ofgenius so seldom bursts forth, so seldom rolls in full-flowingstream, overwhelming your astounded soul?  Because, on either sideof this stream, cold and respectable persons have taken up theirabodes, and, forsooth, their summer-houses and tulip-beds wouldsuffer from the torrent; wherefore they dig trenches, and raiseembankments betimes, in order to avert the impending danger.

　　MAY 27.

　　I find I have fallen into raptures, declamation, and similes, andhave forgotten, in consequence, to tell you what became of thechildren.  Absorbed in my artistic contemplations, which I brieflydescribed in my letter of yesterday, I continued sitting on theplough for two hours.  Toward evening a young woman, with a basketon her arm, came running toward the children, who had not movedall that time.  She exclaimed from a distance, "You are a goodboy, Philip!"  She gave me greeting: I returned it, rose, andapproached her.  I inquired if she were the mother of those prettychildren.  "Yes," she said; and, giving the eldest a piece ofbread, she took the little one in her arms and kissed it with amother's tenderness.  "I left my child in Philip's care," she said,"whilst I went into the town with my eldest boy to buy some wheatenbread, some sugar, and an earthen pot."  I saw the various articlesin the basket, from which the cover had fallen.  "I shall makesome broth to-night for my little Hans (which was the name of theyoungest): that wild fellow, the big one, broke my pot yesterday,whilst he was scrambling with Philip for what remained of thecontents."   I inquired for the eldest; and she bad scarcely timeto tell me that he was driving a couple of geese home from themeadow, when he ran up, and handed Philip an osier-twig.  I talkeda little longer with the woman, and found that she was the daughterof the schoolmaster, and that her husband was gone on a journeyinto Switzerland for some money a relation had left him.  "Theywanted to cheat him," she said, "and would not answer his letters;so he is gone there himself.  I hope he has met with no accident,as I have heard nothing of him since his departure."  I left thewoman, with regret, giving each of the children a kreutzer, withan additional one for the youngest, to buy some wheaten bread forhis broth when she went to town next; and so we parted.  I assureyou, my dear friend, when my thoughts are all in tumult, the sightof such a creature as this tranquillises my disturbed mind.  Shemoves in a happy thoughtlessness within the confined circle of herexistence; she supplies her wants from day to day; and, when shesees the leaves fall, they raise no other idea in her mind thanthat winter is approaching. Since that time I have gone out therefrequently.  The children have become quite familiar with me; andeach gets a lump of sugar when I drink my coffee, and they sharemy milk and bread and butter in the evening.  They always receivetheir kreutzer on Sundays, for the good woman has orders to giveit to them when I do not go there after evening service. They arequite at home with me, tell me everything; and I am particularlyamused with observing their tempers, and the simplicity of theirbehaviour, when some of the other village children are assembledwith them.

　　It has given me a deal of trouble to satisfy the anxiety of themother, lest (as she says) "they should inconvenience the gentleman."

　　MAY 30.

　　What I have lately said of painting is equally true with respectto poetry.  It is only necessary for us to know what is reallyexcellent, and venture to give it expression; and that is sayingmuch in few words.  To-day I have had a scene, which, if literallyrelated, would, make the most beautiful idyl in the world.  Butwhy should I talk of poetry and scenes and idyls?  Can we nevertake pleasure in nature without having recourse to art?

　　If you expect anything grand or magnificent from this introduction,you will be sadly mistaken.  It relates merely to a peasant-lad,who has excited in me the warmest interest.  As usual, I shalltell my story badly; and you, as usual, will think me extravagant.It is Walheim once more -- always Walheim -- which produces thesewonderful phenomena.

　　A party had assembled outside the house under the linden-trees,to drink coffee.  The company did not exactly please me; and, underone pretext or another, I lingered behind.

　　A peasant came from an adjoining house, and set to work arrangingsome part of the same plough which I had lately sketched.  Hisappearance pleased me; and I spoke to him, inquired about hiscircumstances, made his acquaintance, and, as is my wont withpersons of that class, was soon admitted into his confidence.  Hesaid he was in the service of a young widow, who set great storeby him.  He spoke so much of his mistress, and praised her soextravagantly, that I could soon see he was desperately in lovewith her.  "She is no longer young," he said: "and she was treatedso badly by her former husband that she does not mean to marryagain."  From his account it was so evident what incomparablecharms she possessed for him, and how ardently he wished she wouldselect him to extinguish the recollection of her first husband'smisconduct, that I should have to repeat his own words in orderto describe the depth of the poor fellow's attachment, truth, anddevotion.  It would, in fact, require the gifts of a great poetto convey the expression of his features, the harmony of his voice,and the heavenly fire of his eye.  No words can portray thetenderness of his every movement and of every feature: no effortof mine could do justice to the scene.  His alarm lest I shouldmisconceive his position with regard to his mistress, or questionthe propriety of her conduct, touched me particularly.  The charmingmanner with which he described her form and person, which, withoutpossessing the graces of youth, won and attached him to her, isinexpressible, and must be left to the imagination.  I have neverin my life witnessed or fancied or conceived the possibility ofsuch intense devotion, such ardent affections, united with so muchpurity.  Do not blame me if I say that the recollection of thisinnocence and truth is deeply impressed upon my very soul; thatthis picture of fidelity and tenderness haunts me everywhere; andthat my own heart, as though enkindled by the flame, glows andburns within me.

　　I mean now to try and see her as soon as I can: or perhaps, onsecond thoughts, I had better not; it is better I should beholdher through the eyes of her lover.  To my sight, perhaps, she wouldnot appear as she now stands before me; and why should I destroyso sweet a picture?

　　JUNE 16.

　　"Why do I not write to you?"  You lay claim to learning, and asksuch a question.  You should have guessed that I am well -- thatis to say -- in a word, I have made an acquaintance who has wonmy heart: I have -- I know not.

　　To give you a regular account of the manner in which I have becomeacquainted with the most amiable of women would be a difficult task.I am a happy and contented mortal, but a poor historian.

　　An angel!  Nonsense!  Everybody so describes his mistress; and yetI find it impossible to tell you how perfect she is, or why she isso perfect: suffice it to say she has captivated all my senses.

　　So much simplicity with so much understauding -- so mild, and yetso resolute -- a mind so placid, and a life so active.

　　But all this is ugly balderdash, which expresses not a singlecharacter nor feature.  Some other time -- but no, not some othertime, now, this very instant, will I tell you all about it.  Nowor never.  Well, between ourselves, since I commenced my letter,I have been three times on the point of throwing down my pen, ofordering my horse, and riding out.  And yet I vowed this morningthat I would not ride to-day, and yet every moment I am rushingto the window to see how high the sun is.

　　I could not restrain myself -- go to her I must.  I have justreturned, Wilhelm; and whilst I am taking supper I will write toyou.  What a delight it was for my soul to see her in the midstof her dear, beautiful children, -- eight brothers and sisters!

　　But, if I proceed thus, you will be no wiser at the end of myletter than you were at the beginning.  Attend, then, and I willcompel myself to give you the details.

　　I mentioned to you the other day that I had become acquainted withS--, the district judge, and that he had invited me to go and visithim in his retirement, or rather in his little kingdom.  But Ineglected going, and perhaps should never have gone, if chance hadnot discovered to me the treasure which lay concealed in thatretired spot.  Some of our young people had proposed giving a ballin the country, at which I consented to be present.  I offered myhand for the evening to a pretty and agreeable, but rather commonplace,sort of girl from the immediate neighbourhood; and it was agreedthat I should engage a carriage, and call upon Charlotte, with mypartner and her aunt, to convey them to the ball.  My companioninformed me, as we drove along through the park to the hunting-lodge,that I should make the acquaintance of a very charming young lady."Take care," added the aunt, "that you do not lose your heart.""Why?" said I.  "Because she is already engaged to a very worthyman," she replied, "who is gone to settle his affairs upon thedeath of his father, and will succeed to a very considerableinheritance."  This information possessed no interest for me.When we arrived at the gate, the sun was setting behind the topsof the mountains.  The atmosphere was heavy; and the ladies expressedtheir fears of an approaching storm, as masses of low black cloudswere gathering in the horizon.  I relieved their anxieties bypretending to be weather-wise, although I myself had someapprehensions lest our pleasure should be interrupted.

　　I alighted; and a maid came to the door, and requested us to waita moment for her mistress.  I walked across the court to a well-builthouse, and, ascending the flight of steps in front, opened the door,and saw before me the most charming spectacle I had ever witnessed.Six children, from eleven to two years old, were running about thehall, and surrounding a lady of middle height, with a lovely figure,dressed in a robe of simple white, trimmed with pink ribbons.  Shewas holding a rye loaf in her hand, and was cutting slices for thelittle ones all around, in proportion to their age and appetite.She performed her task in a graceful and affectionate manner; eachclaimant awaiting his turn with outstretched hands, and boisterouslyshouting his thanks.  Some of them ran away at once, to enjoy theirevening meal; whilst others, of a gentler disposition, retired tothe courtyard to see the strangers, and to survey the carriage inwhich their Charlotte was to drive away.  "Pray forgive me forgiving you the trouble to come for me, and for keeping the ladieswaiting: but dressing, and arranging some household duties beforeI leave, had made me forget my children's supper; and they do notlike to take it from any one but me."  I uttered some indifferentcompliment: but my whole soul was absorbed by her air, her voice,her manner; and I had scarcely recovered myself when she ran intoher room to fetch her gloves and fan.  The young ones threw inquiringglances at me from a distance; whilst I approached the youngest,a most delicious little creature.  He drew back; and Charlotte,entering at the very moment, said, "Louis, shake hands with yourcousin."  The little fellow obeyed willingly; and I could notresist giving him a hearty kiss, notwithstanding his rather dirtyface.  "Cousin," said I to Charlotte, as I handed her down, "doyou think I deserve the happiness of being related to you?"  Shereplied, with a ready smile, "Oh! I have such a number of cousins,that I should be sorry if you were the most undeserving of them."In taking leave, she desired her next sister, Sophy, a girl abouteleven years old, to take great care of the children, and to saygood-bye to papa for her when he came home from his ride.  Sheenjoined to the little ones to obey their sister Sophy as theywould herself, upon which some promised that they would; but alittle fair-haired girl, about six years old, looked discontented,and said, "But Sophy is not you, Charlotte; and we like you best."The two eldest boys had clambered up the carriage; and, at myrequest, she permitted them to accompany us a little way throughthe forest, upon their promising to sit very still, and hold fast.

　　We were hardly seated, and the ladies had scarcely exchangedcompliments, making the usual remarks upon each other's dress, andupon the company they expected to meet, when Charlotte stopped thecarriage, and made her brothers get down.  They insisted uponkissing her hands once more; which the eldest did with all thetenderness of a youth of fifteen, but the other in a lighter andmore careless manner.  She desired them again to give her love tothe children, and we drove off.

　　The aunt inquired of Charlotte whether she had finished the bookshe had last sent her.  "No," said Charlotte; "I did not like it:you can have it again.  And the one before was not much better."I was surprised, upon asking the title, to hear that it was ____.(We feel obliged to suppress the passage in the letter, to preventany one from feeling aggrieved; although no author need pay muchattention to the opinion of a mere girl, or that of an unsteadyyoung man.)

　　I found penetration and character in everything she said: everyexpression seemed to brighten her features with new charms, --withnew rays of genius, -- which unfolded by degrees, as she feltherself understood.

　　"When I was younger," she observed, "I loved nothing so much asromances.  Nothing could equal my delight when, on some holiday,I could settle down quietly in a corner, and enter with my wholeheart and soul into the joys or sorrows of some fictitious Leonora.I do not deny that they even possess some charms for me yet.  ButI read so seldom, that I prefer books suited exactly to my taste.And I like those authors best whose scenes describe my own situationin life, -- and the friends who are about me, whose stories touchme with interest, from resembling my own homely existence, -- which,without being absolutely paradise, is, on the whole, a source ofindescribable happiness."

　　I endeavoured to conceal the emotion which these words occasioned,but it was of slight avail; for, when she had expressed so trulyher opinion of "The Vicar of Wakefield," and of other works, thenames of which I omit (Though the names are omitted, yet the authorsmentioned deserve Charlotte's approbation, and will feel it intheir hearts when they read this passage. It concerns no otherperson.), I could no longer contain myself, but gave full utteranceto what I thought of it: and it was not until Charlotte had addressedherself to the two other ladies, that I remembered their presence,and observed them sitting mute with astonishment.  The aunt lookedat me several times with an air of raillery, which, however, I didnot at all mind.

　　We talked of the pleasures of dancing. "If it is a fault to loveit," said Charlotte, "I am ready to confess that I prize it aboveall other amusements.  If anything disturbs me, I go to the piano,play an air to which I have danced, and all goes right againdirectly."

　　You, who know me, can fancy how steadfastly I gazed upon her richdark eyes during these remarks, how my very soul gloated over herwarm lips and fresh, glowing cheeks, how I became quite lost inthe delightful meaning of her words, so much so, that I scarcelyheard the actual expressions.  In short, I alighted from thecarriage like a person in a dream, and was so lost to the dimworld around me, that I scarcely heard the music which resoundedfrom the illuminated ballroom.

　　The two Messrs. Andran and a certain N. N. (I cannot trouble myselfwith the names), who were the aunt's and Charlotte's partners,received us at the carriage-door, and took possession of theirladies, whilst I followed with mine.

　　We commenced with a minuet.  I led out one lady after another,and precisely those who were the most disagreeable could not bringthemselves to leave off.  Charlotte and her partner began an Englishcountry dance, and you must imagine my delight when it was theirturn to dance the figure with us.  You should see Charlotte dance.She dances with her whole heart and soul: her figure is all harmony,elegance, and grace, as if she were conscious of nothing else, andhad no other thought or feeling; and, doubtless, for the moment,every other sensation is extinct.

　　She was engaged for the second country dance, but promised me thethird, and assured me, with the most agreeable freedom, that shewas very fond of waltzing.  "It is the custom here," she said,"for the previous partners to waltz together; but my partner isan indifferent waltzer, and will feel delighted if I save him thetrouble.  Your partner is not allowed to waltz, and, indeed, isequally incapable: but I observed during the country dance thatyou waltz well; so, if you will waltz with me, I beg you wouldpropose it to my partner, and I will propose it to yours."  Weagreed, and it was arranged that our partners should mutuallyentertain each other.

　　We set off, and, at first, delighted ourselves with the usualgraceful motions of the arms.  With what grace, with what ease,she moved!  When the waltz commenced, and the dancers whirledaround each other in the giddy maze, there was some confusion,owing to the incapacity of some of the dancers.  We judiciouslyremained still, allowing the others to weary themselves; and, whenthe awkward dancers had withdrawn, we joined in, and kept it upfamously together with one other couple, -- Andran and his partner.Never did I dance more lightly.  I felt myself more than mortal,holding this loveliest of creatures in my arms, flying, with heras rapidly as the wind, till I lost sight of every other object;and O Wilhelm, I vowed at that moment, that a maiden whom I loved,or for whom I felt the slightest attachment, never, never shouldwaltz with any one else but with me, if I went to perdition for it!-- you will understand this.

　　We took a few turns in the room to recover our breath.  Charlottesat down, and felt refreshed by partaking of some oranges which Ihad had secured, -- the only ones that had been left; but at everyslice which, from politeness, she offered to her neighbours, I feltas though a dagger went through my heart.

　　We were the second couple in the third country dance.  As we weregoing down (and Heaven knows with what ecstasy I gazed at her armsand eyes, beaming with the sweetest feeling of pure and genuineenjoyment), we passed a lady whom I had noticed for her charmingexpression of countenance; although she was no longer young.  Shelooked at Charlotte with a smile, then, holding up her finger ina threatening attitude, repeated twice in a very significant toneof voice the name of "Albert."

　　"Who is Albert," said I to Charlotte, "if it is not impertinentto ask?"  She was about to answer, when we were obliged to separate,in order to execute a figure in the dance; and, as we crossed overagain in front of each other, I perceived she looked somewhatpensive.  "Why need I conceal it from you?" she said, as she gaveme her hand for the promenade.  "Albert is a worthy man, to whomI am engaged."  Now, there was nothing new to me in this (for thegirls had told me of it on the way); but it was so far new thatI had not thought of it in connection with her whom, in so shorta time, I had learned to prize so highly.  Enough, I became confused,got out in the figure, and occasioned general confusion; so thatit required all Charlotte's presence of mind to set me right bypulling and pushing me into my proper place.

　　The dance was not yet finished when the lightning which had forsome time been seen in the horizon, and which I had asserted toproceed entirely from heat, grew more violent; and the thunder washeard above the music.  When any distress or terror surprises usin the midst of our amusements, it naturally makes a deeper impressionthan at other times, either because the contrast makes us morekeenly susceptible, or rather perhaps because our senses are thenmore open to impressions, and the shock is consequently stronger.To this cause I must ascribe the fright and shrieks of the ladies.One sagaciously sat down in a corner with her back to the window,and held her fingers to her ears; a second knelt down before her,and hid her face in her lap; a third threw herself between them,and embraced her sister with a thousand tears; some insisted ongoing home; others, unconscious of their actions, wanted sufficientpresence of mind to repress the impertinence of their young partners,who sought to direct to themselves those sighs which the lips ofour agitated beauties intended for heaven.  Some of the gentlemenhad gone down-stairs to smoke a quiet cigar, and the rest of thecompany gladly embraced a happy suggestion of the hostess to retireinto another room which was provided with shutters and curtains.We had hardly got there, when Charlotte placed the chairs in acircle; and, when the company had sat down in compliance with herrequest, she forthwith proposed a round game.

　　I noticed some of the company prepare their mouths and drawthemselves up at the prospect of some agreeable forfeit.  "Let usplay at counting," said Charlotte.  "Now, pay attention: I shallgo round the circle from right to left; and each person is to count,one after the other, the number that comes to him, and must countfast; whoever stops or mistakes is to have a box on the ear, andso on, till we have counted a thousand."  It was delightful to seethe fun.  She went round the circle with upraised arm.  "One,"said the first; "two," the second; "three," the third; and so on,till Charlotte went faster and faster.  One made a mistake, instantlya box on the ear; and, amid the laughter that ensued, came anotherbox; and so on, faster and faster.  I myself came in for two.  Ifancied they were harder than the rest, and felt quite delighted.A general laughter and confusion put an end to the game long beforewe had counted as far as a thousand.  The party broke up intolittle separate knots: the storm had ceased, and I followed Charlotteinto the ballroom.  On the way she said, "The game banished theirfears of the storm."  I could make no reply.  "I myself," shecontinued, "was as much frightened as any of them; but by affectingcourage, to keep up the spirits of the others, I forgot myapprehensions."  We went to the window.  It was still thunderingat a distance: a soft rain was pouring down over the country,and filled the air around us with delicious odours.  Charlotteleaned forward on her arm; her eyes wandered over the scene; sheraised them to the sky, and then turned them upon me; they weremoistened with tears; she placed her hand on mine and said,"Klopstock!" at once I remembered the magnificent ode which wasin her thoughts: I felt oppressed with the weight of my sensations,and sank under them.  It was more than I could bear.  I bent overher hand, kissed it in a stream of delicious tears, and againlooked up to her eyes.  Divine Klopstock! why didst thou not seethy apotheosis in those eyes?  And thy name so often profaned,would that I never heard it repeated!

　　JUNE 19.

　　I no longer remember where I stopped in my narrative: I only knowit was two in the morning when I went to bed; and if you had beenwith me, that I might have talked instead of writing to you, Ishould, in all probability, have kept you up till daylight.

　　I think I have not yet related what happened as we rode home fromthe ball, nor have I time to tell you now.  It was a most magnificentsunrise: the whole country was refreshed, and the rain fell dropby drop from the trees in the forest.  Our companions were asleep.Charlotte asked me if I did not wish to sleep also, and begged ofme not to make any ceremony on her account.  Looking steadfastlyat her, I answered, "As long as I see those eyes open, there isno fear of my falling asleep."  We both continued awake till wereached her door.  The maid opened it softly, and assured her, inanswer to her inquiries, that her father and the children werewell, and still sleeping.  I left her asking permission to visither in the course of the day.  She consented, and I went, and,since that time, sun, moon, and stars may pursue their course: Iknow not whether it is day or night; the whole world is nothingto me.

　　JUNE 21.

　　My days are as happy as those reserved by God for his elect; and,whatever be my fate hereafter, I can never say that I have nottasted joy, -- the purest joy of life.  You know Walheim.  I amnow completely settled there.  In that spot I am only half a leaguefrom Charlotte; and there I enjoy myself, and taste all the pleasurewhich can fall to the lot of man.

　　Little did I imagine, when I selected Walheim for my pedestrianexcursions, that all heaven lay so near it.  How often in mywanderings from the hillside or from the meadows across the river,have I beheld this hunting-lodge, which now contains within it allthe joy of my heart!

　　I have often, my dear Wilhelm, reflected on the eagerness men feelto wander and make new discoveries, and upon that secret impulsewhich afterward inclines them to return to their narrow circle,conform to the laws of custom, and embarrass themselves no longerwith what passes around them.

　　It is so strange how, when I came here first, and gazed upon thatlovely valley from the hillside, I felt charmed with the entirescene surrounding me.  The little wood opposite -- how delightfulto sit under its shade!  How fine the view from that point ofrock!  Then, that delightful chain of hills, and the exquisitevalleys at their feet!  Could I but wander and lose myself amongstthem!  I went, and returned without finding what I wished.  Distance,my friend, is like futurity.  A dim vastness is spread before oursouls: the perceptions of our mind are as obscure as those of ourvision; and we desire earnestly to surrender up our whole being,that it may be filled with the complete and perfect bliss of oneglorious emotion.  But alas! when we have attained our object,when the distant there becomes the present here, all is changed:we are as poor and circumscribed as ever, and our souls stilllanguish for unattainable happiness.

　　So does the restless traveller pant for his native soil, and findin his own cottage, in the arms of his wife, in the affections ofhis children, and in the labour necessary for their support, thathappiness which he had sought in vain through the wide world.

　　When, in the morning at sunrise, I go out to Walheim, and with myown hands gather in the garden the pease which are to serve formy dinner, when I sit down to shell them, and read my Homer duringthe intervals, and then, selecting a saucepan from the kitchen,fetch my own butter, put my mess on the fire, cover it up, and sitdown to stir it as occasion requires, I figure to myself theillustrious suitors of Penelope, killing, dressing, and preparingtheir own oxen and swine.  Nothing fills me with a more pure andgenuine sense of happiness than those traits of patriarchal lifewhich, thank Heaven! I can imitate without affectation.  Happy isit, indeed, for me that my heart is capable of feeling the samesimple and innocent pleasure as the peasant whose table is coveredwith food of his own rearing, and who not only enjoys his meal, butremembers with delight the happy days and sunny mornings when heplanted it, the soft evenings when he watered it, and the pleasurehe experienced in watching its daily growth.

　　JUNE 29.

　　The day before yesterday, the physician came from the town to paya visit to the judge.  He found me on the floor playing withCharlotte's children.  Some of them were scrambling over me, andothers romped with me; and, as I caught and tickled them, theymade a great noise.  The doctor is a formal sort of personage: headjusts the plaits of his ruffles, and continually settles hisfrill whilst he is talking to you; and he thought my conduct beneaththe dignity of a sensible man.  I could perceive this by hiscountenance.  But I did not suffer myself to be disturbed.  Iallowed him to continue his wise conversation, whilst I rebuiltthe children's card houses for them as fast as they threw themdown.  He went about the town afterward, complaining that thejudge's children were spoiled enough before, but that now Wertherwas completely ruining them.

　　Yes, my dear Wilhelm, nothing on this earth affects my heart somuch as children.  When I look on at their doings; when I mark inthe little creatures the seeds of all those virtues and qualitieswhich they will one day find so indispensable; when I behold inthe obstinate all the future firmness and constancy of a noblecharacter; in the capricious, that levity and gaiety of temperwhich will carry them lightly over the dangers and troubles oflife, their whole nature simple and unpolluted, -- then I callto mind the golden words of the Great Teacher of mankind, "Unlessye become like one of these!"  And now, my friend, these children,who are our equals, whom we ought to consider as our models, wetreat them as though they were our subjects.  They are allowed nowill of their own.  And have we, then, none ourselves? Whence comesour exclusive right?  Is it because we are older and more experienced?Great God! from the height of thy heaven thou beholdest greatchildren and little children, and no others; and thy Son has longsince declared which afford thee greatest pleasure.  But theybelieve in him, and hear him not, --that, too, is an old story;and they train their children after their own image, etc.

　　Adieu, Wilhelm: I will not further bewilder myself with this subject.

　　JULY 1.

　　The consolation Charlotte can bring to an invalid I experiencefrom my own heart, which suffers more from her absence than manya poor creature lingering on a bed of sickness.  She is gone tospend a few days in the town with a very worthy woman, who is givenover by the physicians, and wishes to have Charlotte near her inher last moments.  I accompanied her last week on a visit to theVicar of S--, a small village in the mountains, about a leaguehence.  We arrived about four o'clock: Charlotte had taken herlittle sister with her.  When we entered the vicarage court, wefound the good old man sitting on a bench before the door, underthe shade of two large walnut-trees.  At the  sight of Charlottehe seemed to gain new life, rose, forgot his stick, and venturedto walk toward her.  She ran to him, and made him sit down again;then, placing herself by his side, she gave him a number of messagesfrom her father, and then caught up his youngest child, a dirty,ugly little thing, the joy of his old age, and kissed it.  I wishyou could have witnessed her attention to this old man, --how sheraised her voice on account of his deafness; how she told him ofhealthy young people, who had been carried off when it was leastexpected; praised the virtues of Carlsbad, and commended hisdetermination to spend the ensuing summer there; and assured himthat he looked better and stronger than he did when she saw himlast.  I, in the meantime, paid attention to his good lady.  Theold man seemed quite in spirits; and as I could not help admiringthe beauty of the walnut-trees, which formed such an agreeableshade over our heads, he began, though with some little difficulty,to tell us their history.  "As to the oldest," said he, "we do notknow who planted it, -- some say one clergyman, and some another:but the younger one, there behind us, is exactly the age of my wife,fifty years old next October; her father planted it in the morning,and in the evening she came into the world.  My wife's father wasmy predecessor here, and I cannot tell you how fond he was of thattree; and it is fully as dear to me.  Under the shade of that verytree, upon a log of wood, my wife was seated knitting, when I, apoor student, came into this court for the first time, just sevenand twenty years ago." Charlotte inquired for his daughter.  Hesaid she was gone with Herr Schmidt to the meadows, and was withthe haymakers.  The old man then resumed his story, and told ushow his predecessor had taken a fancy to him, as had his daughterlikewise; and how he had become first his curate, and subsequentlyhis successor.  He had scarcely finished his story when his daughterreturned through the garden, accompanied by the above-mentionedHerr Schmidt.  She welcomed Charlotte affectionately, and I confessI was much taken with her appearance.  She was a lively-looking,good-humoured brunette, quite competent to amuse one for a shorttime in the country.  Her lover (for such Herr Schmidt evidentlyappeared to be) was a polite, reserved personage, and would notjoin our conversation, notwithstanding all Charlotte's endeavoursto draw him out.  I was much annoyed at observing, by his countenance,that his silence did not arise from want of talent, but from capriceand ill-humour.  This subsequently became very evident, when weset out to take a walk, and Frederica joining Charlotte, with whomI was talking, the worthy gentleman's face, which was naturallyrather sombre, became so dark and angry that Charlotte was obligedto touch my arm, and remind me that I was talking too much toFrederica.  Nothing distresses me more than to see men tormenteach other; particularly when in the flower of their age, in thevery season of pleasure, they waste their few short days of sunshinein quarrels and disputes, and only perceive their error when itis too late to repair it.  This thought dwelt upon my mind; andin the evening, when we returned to the vicar's, and were sittinground the table with our bread end milk, the conversation turnedon the joys and sorrows of the world, I could not resist thetemptation to inveigh bitterly against ill-humour.  "We are apt,"said I, "to complain, but - with very little cause, that our happydays are few, and our evil days many.  If our hearts were alwaysdisposed to receive the benefits Heaven sends us, we should acquirestrength to support evil when it comes." "But," observed the vicar'swife, "we cannot always command our tempers, so much depends uponthe constitution: when the body suffers, the mind is ill at ease.""I acknowledge that," I continued; "but we must consider such adisposition in the light of a disease, and inquire whether thereis no remedy for it."

　　"I should be glad to hear one," said Charlotte: "at least, I thinkvery much depends upon ourselves; I know it is so with me. Whenanything annoys me, and disturbs my temper, I hasten into thegarden, hum a couple of country dances, and it is all right withme directly."  "That is what I meant," I replied; "ill-humourresembles indolence: it is natural to us; but if once we havecourage to exert ourselves, we find our work run fresh from ourhands, and we experience in the activity from which we shrank areal enjoyment."  Frederica listened very attentively: and theyoung man objected, that we were not masters of ourselves, andstill less so of our feelings.  "The question is about a disagreeablefeeling," I added, "from which every one would willingly escape,but none know their own power without trial.  Invalids are gladto consult physicians, and submit to the most scrupulous regimen,the most nauseous medicines, in order to recover their health."I observed that the good old man inclined his head, and exertedhimself to hear our discourse; so I raised my voice, and addressedmyself directly to him.  We preach against a great many crimes,"I observed, "but I never remember a sermon delivered againstill-humour."  "That may do very well for your town clergymen,"said he: "country people are never ill-humoured; though, indeed,it might be useful, occasionally, to my wife for instance, and thejudge."  We all laughed, as did he likewise very cordially, tillhe fell into a fit of coughing, which interrupted our conversationfor a time.  Herr Schmidt resumed the subject.  "You call illhumour a crime," he remarked, "but I think you use too strong aterm."  "Not at all," I replied, "if that deserves the name whichis so pernicious to ourselves and our neighbours.  Is it not enoughthat we want the power to make one another happy, must we depriveeach other of the pleasure which we can all make for ourselves?Show me the man who has the courage to hide his ill-humour, whobears the whole burden himself, without disturbing the peace ofthose around him.  No: ill-humour arises from an inward consciousnessof our own want of merit, from a discontent which ever accompaniesthat envy which foolish vanity engenders.  We see people happy,whom we have not made so, and cannot endure the sight."  Charlottelooked at me with a smile; she observed the emotion with which Ispoke: and a tear in the eyes of Frederica stimulated me to proceed."Woe unto those," I said, "who use their power over a human heartto destroy the simple pleasures it would naturally enjoy!  All thefavours, all the attentions, in the world cannot compensate forthe loss of that happiness which a cruel tyranny has destroyed."My heart was full as I spoke.  A recollection of many things whichhad happened pressed upon my mind, and filled my eyes with tears."We should daily repeat to ourselves," I exclaimed, "that we shouldnot interfere with our friends, unless to leave them in possessionof their own joys, and increase their happiness by sharing it withthem!  But when their souls are tormented by a violent passion,or their hearts rent with grief, is it in your power to affordthem the slightest consolation?

　　"And when the last fatal malady seizes the being whose untimelygrave you have prepared, when she lies languid and exhausted beforeyou, her dim eyes raised to heaven, and the damp of death upon herpallid brow, there you stand at her bedside like a condemnedcriminal, with the bitter feeling that your whole fortune couldnot save her; and the agonising thought wrings you, that all yourefforts are powerless to impart even a moment's strength to thedeparting soul, or quicken her with a transitory consolation."

　　At these words the remembrance of a similar scene at which I hadbeen once present fell with full force upon my heart. I buried myface in my handkerchief, and hastened from the room, and was onlyrecalled to my recollection by Charlotte's voice, who reminded methat it was time to return home.  With what tenderness she chidme on the way for the too eager interest I took in everything!She declared it would do me injury, and that I ought to sparemyself.  Yes, my angel!  I will do so for your sake.

　　JULY 6.

　　She is still with her dying friend, and is still the same bright,beautiful creature whose presence softens pain, and sheds happinessaround whichever way she turns.  She went out yesterday with herlittle sisters: I knew it, and went to meet them; and we walkedtogether.  In about an hour and a half we returned to the town.We stopped at the spring I am so fond of, and which is now athousand times dearer to me than ever.  Charlotte seated herselfupon the low wall, and we gathered about her.  I looked around,and recalled the time when my heart was unoccupied and free."Dear fountain!" I said, "since that time I have no more come toenjoy cool repose by thy fresh stream: I have passed thee withcareless steps, and scarcely bestowed a glance upon thee."  Ilooked down, and observed Charlotte's little sister, Jane, comingup the steps with a glass of water.  I turned toward Charlotte,and I felt her influence over me.  Jane at the moment approachedwith the glass.  Her sister, Marianne, wished to take it from her."No!" cried the child, with the sweetest expression of face,"Charlotte must drink first."

　　The affection and simplicity with which this was uttered so charmedme, that I sought to express my feelings by catching up the childand kissing her heartily.  She was frightened, and began to cry."You should not do that," said Charlotte: I felt perplexed.  "Come,Jane," she continued, taking her hand, and leading her down thesteps again, "it is no matter: wash yourself quickly in the freshwater."  I stood and watched them; and when I saw the little dearrubbing her cheeks with her wet hands, in full belief that allthe impurities contracted from my ugly beard would be washed offby the miraculous water, and how, though Charlotte said it woulddo, she continued still to wash with all her might, as though shethought too much were better than too little, I assure you, Wilhelm,I never attended a baptism with greater reverence; and, whenCharlotte came up from the well, I could have prostrated myselfas before the prophet of an Eastern nation.

　　In the evening I would not resist telling the story to a personwho, I thought, possessed some natural feeling, because he was aman of understanding.  But what a mistake I made.  He maintainedit was very wrong of Charlotte, that we should not deceive children,that such things occasioned countless mistakes and superstitions,from which we were bound to protect the young.  It occurred to methen, that this very man had been baptised only a week before; soI said nothing further, but maintained the justice of my ownconvictions.  We should deal with children as God deals with us,we are happiest under the influence of innocent delusions.

　　JULY 8.

　　What a child is man that he should be so solicitous about a look!What a child is man!  We had been to Walheim: the ladies went ina carriage; but during our walk I thought I saw in Charlotte'sdark eyes -- I am a fool -- but forgive me! you should see them,-- those eyes. -- However, to be brief (for my own eyes are weigheddown with sleep), you must know, when the ladies stepped into theircarriage again, young W. Seldstadt, Andran, and I were standingabout the door.  They are a merry set of fellows, and they wereall laughing and joking together.  I watched Charlotte's eyes.They wandered from one to the other; but they did not light on me,on me, who stood there motionless, and who saw nothing but her!My heart bade her a thousand times adieu, but she noticed me not.The carriage drove off; and my eyes filled with tears.  I lookedafter her: suddenly I saw Charlotte's bonnet leaning out of thewindow, and she turned to look back, was it at me?  My dear friend,I know not; and in this uncertainty I find consolation.  Perhapsshe turned to look at me.  Perhaps!  Good-night -- what a child I am!

　　JULY lO.

　　You should see how foolish I look in company when her name ismentioned, particularly when I am asked plainly how I like her.How I like her!  I detest the phrase.  What sort of creature musthe be who merely liked Charlotte, whose whole heart and senseswere not entirely absorbed by her.  Like her!  Some one asked melately how I liked Ossian.

　　JULY 11.

　　Madame M-- is very ill.  I pray for her recovery, because Charlotteshares my sufferings.  I see her occasionally at my friend's house,and to-day she has told me the strangest circumstance.  Old M--is a covetous, miserly fellow, who has long worried and annoyedthe poor lady sadly; but she has borne her afflictions patiently.A few days ago, when the physician informed us that her recoverywas hopeless, she sent for her husband (Charlotte was present),and addressed him thus: "I have something to confess, which, aftermy decease, may occasion trouble and confusion.  I have hithertoconducted your household as frugally and economically as possible,but you must pardon me for having defrauded you for thirty years.At the commencement of our married life, you allowed a small sumfor the wants of the kitchen, and the other household expenses.When our establishment increased and our property grew larger, Icould not persuade you to increase the weekly allowance in proportion:in short, you know, that, when our wants were greatest, you requiredme to supply everything with seven florins a week.  I took themoney from you without an observation, but made up the weeklydeficiency from the money-chest; as nobody would suspect your wifeof robbing the household bank.  But I have wasted nothing, andshould have been content to meet my eternal Judge without thisconfession, if she, upon whom the management of your establishmentwill devolve after my decease, would be free from embarrassmentupon your insisting that the allowance made to me, your formerwife, was sufficient."

　　I talked with Charlotte of the inconceivable manner in which menallow themselves to be blinded; how any one could avoid suspectingsome deception, when seven florins only were allowed to defrayexpenses twice as great.  But I have myself known people whobelieved, without any visible astonishment, that their housepossessed the prophet's never-failing cruse of oil.

　　JULY 13.

　　No, I am not deceived.  In her dark eyes I read a genuine interestin me and in my fortunes.  Yes, I feel it; and I may believe myown heart which tells me -- dare I say it? -- dare I pronouncethe divine words? -- that she loves me!

　　That she loves me!  How the idea exalts me in my own eyes!  And,as you can understand my feelings, I may say to you, how I honourmyself since she loves me!

　　Is this presumption, or is it a consciousness of the truth?  I donot know a man able to supplant me in the heart of Charlotte; andyet when she speaks of her betrothed with so much warmth andaffection, I feel like the soldier who has been stripped of hishonours and titles, and deprived of his sword.

　　JULY 16.

　　How my heart beats when by accident I touch her finger, or my feetmeet hers under the table!  I draw back as if from a furnace; buta secret force impels me forward again, and my senses becomedisordered.  Her innocent, unconscious heart never knows what agonythese little familiarities inflict upon me.  Sometimes when weare talking she Iays her hand upon mine, and in the eagerness ofconversation comes closer to me, and her balmy breath reaches mylips, -- when I feel as if lightning had struck me, and that Icould sink into the earth.  And yet, Wilhelm, with all this heavenlyconfidence, -- if I know myself, and should ever dare -- youunderstand me.  No, no!  my heart is not so corrupt, it is weak,weak enough but is not that a degree of corruption?

　　She is to me a sacred being.  All passion is still in her presence:I cannot express my sensations when I am near her.  I feel as ifmy soul beat in every nerve of my body.  There is a melody whichshe plays on the piano with angelic skill, -- so simple is it,and yet so spiritual!  It is her favourite air; and, when sheplays the first note, all pain, care, and sorrow disappear fromme in a moment.

　　I believe every word that is said of the magic of ancient music.How her simple song enchants me!  Sometimes, when I am ready tocommit suicide, she sings that air; and instantly the gloom andmadness which hung over me are dispersed, and I breathe freelyagain.

　　JULY 18.

　　Wilhelm, what is the world to our hearts without love?  What isa magic-lantern without light?  You have but to kindle the flamewithin, and the brightest figures shine on the white wall; and,if love only show us fleeting shadows, we are yet happy, when,like mere children, we behold them, and are transported with thesplendid phantoms.  I have not been able to see Charlotte to-day.I was prevented by company from which I could not disengage myself.What was to be done?  I sent my servant to her house, that I mightat least see somebody to-day who had been near her.  Oh, theimpatience with which I waited for his return!  the joy with whichI welcomed him!  I should certainly have caught him in my arms,and kissed him, if I had not been ashamed.

　　It is said that the Bonona stone, when placed in the sun, attractsthe rays, and for a time appears luminous in the dark.  So was itwith me and this servant.  The idea that Charlotte's eyes had dwelton his countenance, his cheek, his very apparel, endeared them allinestimably to me, so that at the moment I would not have partedfrom him for a thousand crowns.  His presence made me so happy!Beware of laughing at me, Wilhelm.  Can that be a delusion whichmakes us happy?

　　JULY 19.

　　"I shall see her today!" I exclaim with delight, when I rise inthe morning, and look out with gladness of heart at the bright,beautiful sun.  "I shall see her today!"  And then I have nofurther wish to form: all, all is included in that one thought.

　　JULY 2O.

　　I cannot assent to your proposal that I should accompany theambassador to _______.  I do not love subordination; and we allknow that he is a rough, disagreeable person to be connected with.You say my mother wishes me to be employed.  I could not helplaughing at that.  Am I not sufficiently employed?  And is it notin reality the same, whether I shell peas or count lentils?  Theworld runs on from one folly to another; and the man who, solelyfrom regard to the opinion of others, and without any wish ornecessity of his own, toils after gold, honour, or any otherphantom, is no better than a fool.

　　JULY 24.

　　You insist so much on my not neglecting my drawing, that it wouldbe as well for me to say nothing as to confess how little I havelately done.

　　I never felt happier, I never understood nature better, even downto the veriest stem or smallest blade of grass ; and yet I amunable to express myself: my powers of execution are so weak,everything seems to swim and float before me, so that I cannotmake a clear, bold outline.  But I fancy I should succeed betterif I had some clay or wax to model.  I shall try, if this stateof mind continues much longer, and will take to modelling, if Ionly knead dough.

　　I have commenced Charlotte's portrait three times, and have asoften disgraced myself.  This is the more annoying, as I wasformerly very happy in taking likenesses.  I have since sketchedher profile, and must content myself with that.

　　JULY 25.

　　Yes, dear Charlotte!  I will order and arrange everything.  Onlygive me more commissions, the more the better.  One thing, however,I must request: use no more writing-sand with the dear notes yousend me.  Today I raised your letter hastily to my lips, and itset my teeth on edge.

　　JULY 26.

　　I have often determined not to see her so frequently.  But whocould keep such a resolution?  Every day I am exposed to thetemptation, and promise faithfully that to-morrow I will reallystay away: but, when tomorrow comes, I find some irresistiblereason for seeing her; and, before I can account for it, I am withher again.  Either she has said on the previous evening "You willbe sure to call to-morrow," -- and who could stay away then? --orshe gives me some commission, and I find it essential to takeher the answer in person; or the day is fine, and I walk to Walheim;and, when I am there, it is only half a league farther to her.  Iam within the charmed atmosphere, and soon find myself at her side.My grandmother used to tell us a story of a mountain of loadstone.When any vessels came near it, they were instantly deprived oftheir ironwork: the nails flew to the mountain, and the unhappycrew perished amidst the disjointed planks.

　　JULY 30.

　　Albert is arrived, and I must take my departure.  Were he the bestand noblest of men, and I in every respect his inferior, I couldnot endure to see him in possession of such a perfect being.Possession! -- enough, Wilhelm:  her betrothed is here, -- a fine,worthy fellow, whom one cannot help liking.  Fortunately I was notpresent at their meeting.  It would have broken my heart!  And heis so considerate: he has not given Charlotte one kiss in mypresence.  Heaven reward him for it!  I must love him for therespect with which he treats her.  He shows a regard for me, butfor this I suspect I am more indebted to Charlotte than to his ownfancy for me.  Women have a delicate tact in such matters, and itshould be so.  They cannot always succeed in keeping two rivalson terms with each other; but, when they do, they are the onlygainers.

　　I cannot help esteeming Albert.  The coolness of his temper contrastsstrongly with the impetuosity of mine, which I cannot conceal.He has a great deal of feeling, and is fully sensible of thetreasure he possesses in Charlotte.  He is free from ill-humour,which you know is the fault I detest most.

　　He regards me as a man of sense; and my attachment to Charlotte,and the interest I take in all that concerns her, augment histriumph and his love.  I shall not inquire whether he may not attimes tease her with some little jealousies; as I know, that, wereI in his place, I should not be entirely free from such sensations.

　　But, be that as it may, my pleasure with Charlotte is over.  Callit folly or infatuation, what signifies a name?  The thing speaksfor itself.  Before Albert came, I knew all that I know now.  Iknew I could make no pretensions to her, nor did I offer any, thatis, as far as it was possible, in the presence of so much loveliness,not to pant for its enjoyment.  And now, behold me like a sillyfellow, staring with astonishment when another comes in, anddeprives me of my love.

　　I bite my lips, and feel infinite scorn for those who tell me tobe resigned, because there is no help for it.  Let me escape fromthe yoke of such silly subterfuges!  I ramble through the woods;and when I return to Charlotte, and find Albert sitting by herside in the summer-house in the garden, I am unable to bear it,behave like a fool, and commit a thousand extravagances.  "ForHeaven's sake," said Charlotte today, "let us have no more sceneslike those of last night!  You terrify me when you are so violent."Between ourselves, I am always away now when he visits her: and Ifeel delighted when I find her alone.

　　AUGUST 8.

　　Believe me, dear Wilhelm, I did not allude to you when I spoke soseverely of those who advise resignation to inevitable fate.  Idid not think it possible for you to indulge such a sentiment.But in fact you are right.  I only suggest one objection.  In thisworld one is seldom reduced to make a selection between twoalternatives.  There are as many varieties of conduct and opinionas there are turns of feature between an aquiline nose and a flatone.

　　You will, therefore, permit me to concede your entire argument,and yet contrive means to escape your dilemma.

　　Your position is this, I hear you say: "Either you have hopes ofobtaining Charlotte, or you have none. Well, in the first case,pursue your course, and press on to the fulfilment of your wishes.In the second, be a man, and shake off a miserable passion, whichwill enervate and destroy you."  My dear friend, this is well andeasily said.

　　But would you require a wretched being, whose life is slowly wastingunder a lingering disease, to despatch himself at once by thestroke of a dagger?  Does not the very disorder which consumes hisstrength deprive him of the courage to effect his deliverance?

　　You may answer me, if you please, with a similar analogy, "Whowould not prefer the amputation of an arm to the periling of lifeby doubt and procrastination!"  But I know not if I am right, andlet us leave these comparisons.

　　Enough!  There are moments, Wilhelm, when I could rise up and shakeit all off, and when, if I only knew where to go, I could fly fromthis place.

　　THE SAME EVENING.

　　My diary, which I have for some time neglected, came before metoday; and I am amazed to see how deliberately I have entangledmyself step by step.  To have seen my position so clearly, andyet to have acted so like a child!  Even still I behold theresult plainly, and yet have no thought of acting with greaterprudence.

　　AUGUST lO.

　　If I were not a fool, I could spend the happiest and most delightfullife here.  So many agreeable circumstances, and of a kind toensure a worthy man's happiness, are seldom united.  Alas!  I feelit too sensibly, -- the heart alone makes our happiness!  To beadmitted into this most charming family, to be loved by the fatheras a son, by the children as a father, and by Charlotte!  then thenoble Albert, who never disturbs my happiness by any appearanceof ill-humour, receiving me with the heartiest affection, andloving me, next to Charlotte, better than all the world!  Wilhelm,you would be delighted to hear us in our rambles, and conversationsabout Charlotte.  Nothing in the world can be more absurd than ourconnection, and yet the thought of it often moves me to tears.

　　He tells me sometimes of her excellent mother; how, upon herdeath-bed, she had committed her house and children to Charlotte,and had given Charlotte herself in charge to him; how, since thattime, a new spirit had taken possession of her; how, in care andanxiety for their welfare, she became a real mother to them; howevery moment of her time was devoted to some labour of love intheir behalf, -- and yet her mirth and cheerfulness had neverforsaken her.  I walk by his side, pluck flowers by the way, arrangethem carefully into a nosegay, then fling them into the firststream I pass, and watch them as they float gently away.  I forgetwhether I told you that Albert is to remain here.  He has receiveda government appointment, with a very good salary; and I understandhe is in high favour at court.  I have met few persons so punctualand methodical in business.

　　AUGUST 12.

　　Certainly Albert is the best fellow in the world.  I had a strangescene with him yesterday.  I went to take leave of him; for I tookit into my head to spend a few days in these mountains, from whereI now write to you.  As I was walking up and down his room, my eyefell upon his pistols. "Lend me those pistols," said I, "for myjourney."  "By all means," he replied, "if you will take thetrouble to load them; for they only hang there for form."  Itook down one of them; and he continued, "Ever since I was nearsuffering for my extreme caution, I will have nothing to do withsuch things."  I was curious to hear the story.  "I was staying,"said he, "some three months ago, at a friend's house in the country.I had a brace of pistols with me, unloaded; and I slept withoutany anxiety.  One rainy afternoon I was sitting by myself, doingnothing, when it occurred to me I do not know how that the housemight be attacked, that we might require the pistols, that we mightin short, you know how we go on fancying, when we have nothingbetter to do.  I gave the pistols to the servant, to clean andload.  He was playing with the maid, and trying to frighten her,when the pistol went off -- God knows how! -- the ramrod was inthe barrel; and it went straight through her right hand, andshattered the thumb.  I had to endure all the lamentation, and topay the surgeon's bill; so, since that time, I have kept all myweapons unloaded.  But, my dear friend, what is the use of prudence?We can never be on our guard against all possible dangers.  However,"-- now, you must know I can tolerate all men till they come to"however;" -- for it is self-evident that every universal rulemust have its exceptions.  But he is so exceedingly accurate, that,if he only fancies he has said a word too precipitate, or toogeneral, or only half true, he never ceases to qualify, to modify,and extenuate, till at last he appears to have said nothing atall.  Upon this occasion, Albert was deeply immersed in hissubject: I ceased to listen to him, and became lost in reverie.With a sudden motion, I pointed the mouth of the pistol to myforehead, over the right eye.  "What do vou mean?" cried Albert,turning back the pistol.  "It is not loaded," said I.  "And evenif not," he answered with impatience,  "what can you mean? Icannot cornprehend how a man can be so mad as to shoot himself,and the bare idea of it shocks me."

　　"But why should any one," said I, "in speaking of an action, ventureto pronounce it mad or wise, or good or bad?  What is the meaningof all this?  Have you carefully studied the secret motives of ouractions?  Do you understand -- can you explain the causes whichoccasion them, and make them inevitable?  If you can, you will beless hasty with your decision."

　　"But you will allow," said Albert; "that some actions are criminal,let them spring from whatever motives they may."  I granted it,and shrugged my shoulders.

　　"But still, my good friend," I continued, "there are some exceptionshere too.  Theft is a crime; but the man who commits it from extremepoverty, with no design but to save his family from perishing, ishe an object of pity, or of punishment?  Who shall throw the firststone at a husband, who, in the heat of just resentment, sacrificeshis faithless wife and her perfidious seducer? or at the youngmaiden, who, in her weak hour of rapture, forgets herself in theimpetuous joys of love?  Even our laws, cold and cruel as theyare, relent in such cases, and withhold their punishment."

　　"That is quite another thing," said Albert; "because a man underthe influence of violent passion loses alI power of reflection,and is regarded as intoxicated or insane."

　　"Oh! you people of sound understandings," I replied, smiling, "areever ready to exclaim 'Extravagance, and madness, and intoxication!'You moral men are so calm and so subdued!  You abhor the drunkenman, and detest the extravagant; you pass by, like the Levite,and thank God, like the Pharisee, that you are not like one ofthem.  I have been more than once intoxicated, my passions havealways bordered on extravagance: I am not ashamed to confess it;for I have learned, by my own experience, that all extraordinarymen, who have accomplished great and astonishing actions, haveever been decried by the world as drunken or insane.  And inprivate life, too, is it not intolerable that no one can undertakethe execution of a noble or generous deed, without giving rise tothe exclamation that the doer is intoxicated or mad?  Shame uponyou, ye sages!"

　　"This is another of your extravagant humours," said Albert: "youalways exaggerate a case, and in this matter you are undoubtedlywrong; for we were speaking of suicide, which you compare withgreat actions, when it is impossible to regard it as anything buta weakness.  It is much easier to die than to bear a life of miserywith fortitude."

　　I was on the point of breaking off the conversation, for nothingputs me so completely out of patience as the utterance of a wretchedcommonplace when I am talking from my inmost heart.  However, Icomposed myself, for I had often heard the same observation withsufficient vexation; and I answered him, therefore, with a littlewarmth,  "You call this a weakness -- beware of being led astrayby appearances.  When a nation, which has long groaned under theintolerable yoke of a tyrant, rises at last and throws off itschains, do you call that weakness?  The man who, to rescue hishouse from the flames, finds his physical strength redoubled, sothat he lifts burdens with ease, which, in the absence of excitement,he could scarcely move; he who, under the rage of an insult, attacksand puts to flight half a score of his enemies, are such personsto be called weak?  My good friend, if resistance be strength, howcan the highest degree of resistance be a weakness?"

　　Albert looked steadfastly at me, and said, "Pray forgive me, butI do not see that the examples you have adduced bear any relationto the question."  "Very likely," I answered; "for I have oftenbeen told that my style of illustration borders a little on theabsurd.  But let us see if we cannot place the matter in anotherpoint of view, by inquiring what can be a man's state of mind whoresolves to free himself from the burden of life, -- a burden oftenso pleasant to bear, -- for we cannot otherwise reason fairly uponthe subject.

　　"Human nature," I continued, "has its limits.  It is able to endurea certain degree of joy, sorrow, and pain, but becomes annihilatedas soon as this measure is exceeded.  The question, therefore, is,not whether a man is strong or weak, but whether he is able toendure the measure of his sufferings.  The suffering may be moralor physical; and in my opinion it is just as absurd to call a mana coward who destroys himself, as to call a man a coward who diesof a malignant fever."

　　"Paradox, all paradox!" exclaimed Albert.  "Not so paradoxical asyou imagine," I replied.  "You allow that we designate a diseaseas mortal when nature is so severely attacked, and her strengthso far exhausted, that she cannot possibly recover her formercondition under any change that may take place.

　　"Now, my good friend, apply this to the mind; observe a man in hisnatural, isolated condition; consider how ideas work, and howimpressions fasten on him, till at length a violent passion seizeshim, destroying all his powers of calm reflection, and utterlyruining him.

　　"It is in vain that a man of sound mind and cool temper understandsthe condition of such a wretched being, in vain he counsels him.He can no more communicate his own wisdom to him than a healthyman can instil his strength into the invalid, by whose bedside heis seated."

　　Albert thought this too general.  I reminded him of a girl who haddrowned herself a short time previously, and I related her history.

　　She was a good creature, who had grown up in the narrow sphere ofhousehold industry and weekly appointed labour; one who knew nopleasure beyond indulging in a walk on Sundays, arrayed in herbest attire, accompanied by her friends, or perhaps joining in thedance now and then at some festival, and chatting away her sparehours with a neighbour, discussing the scandal or the quarrels ofthe village, trifles sufficient to occupy her heart.  At lengththe warmth of her nature is influenced by certain new and unknownwishes.  Inflamed by the flatteries of men, her former pleasuresbecome by degrees insipid, till at length she meets with a youthto whom she is attracted by an indescribable feeling; upon him shenow rests all her hopes; she forgets the world around her; shesees, hears, desires nothing but him, and him only.  He aloneoccupies all her thoughts.  Uncorrupted by the idle indulgence ofan enervating vanity, her affection moving steadily toward itsobject, she hopes to become his, and to realise, in an everlastingunion with him, all that happiness which she sought, all that blissfor which she longed.  His repeated promises confirm her hopes:embraces and endearments, which increase the ardour of her desires,overmaster her soul.  She floats in a dim, delusive anticipationof her happiness; and her feelings become excited to their utmosttension.  She stretches out her arms finally to embrace the objectof all her wishes and her lover forsakes her.  Stunned and bewildered,she stands upon a precipice.  All is darkness around her.  Noprospect, no hope, no consolation -- forsaken by him in whom herexistence was centred!  She sees nothing of the wide world beforeher, thinks nothing of the many individuals who might supply thevoid in her heart; she feels herself deserted, forsaken by theworld; and, blinded and impelled by the agony which wrings hersoul, she plunges into the deep, to end her sufferings in the broadembrace of death.  See here, Albert, the history of thousands; andtell me, is not this a case of physical infirmity?  Nature has noway to escape from the labyrinth: her powers are exhausted: shecan contend no longer, and the poor soul must die.

　　"Shame upon him who can look on calmly, and exclaim, 'The foolishgirl! she should have waited; she should have allowed time to wearoff the impression; her despair would have been softened, and shewould have found another lover to comfort her.'  One might as wellsay, 'The fool, to die of a fever! why did he not wait till hisstrength was restored, till his blood became calm? all would thenhave gone well, and he would have been alive now.'"

　　Albert, who could not see the justice of the comparison, offeredsome further objections, and, amongst others, urged that I hadtaken the case of a mere ignorant girl.  But how any man of sense,of more enlarged views and experience, could be excused, he wasunable to comprehend.  "My friend!" I exclaimed, "man is but man;and, whatever be the extent of his reasoning powers, they are oflittle avail when passion rages within, and he feels himselfconfined by the narrow limits of nature.  It were better, then --but we will talk of this some other time," I said, and caught upmy hat.  Alas! my heart was full; and we parted without convictionon either side.  How rarely in this world do men understand eachother!

　　AUGUST 15.

　　There can be no doubt that in this world nothing is so indispensableas love.  I observe that Charlotte could not lose me without apang, and the very children have but one wish; that is, that Ishould visit them again to-morrow.  I went this afternoon to tuneCharlotte's piano.  But I could not do it, for the little onesinsisted on my telling them a story; and Charlotte herself urgedme to satisfy them.  I waited upon them at tea, and they are nowas fully contented with me as with Charlotte; and I told them myvery best tale of the princess who was waited upon by dwarfs.I improve myself by this exercise, and am quite surprised at theimpression my stories create.  If I sometimes invent an incidentwhich I forget upon the next narration, they remind one directlythat the story was different before; so that I now endeavour torelate with exactness the same anecdote in the same monotonoustone, which never changes.  I find by this, how much an authorinjures his works by altering them, even though they be improvedin a poetical point of view.  The first impression is readilyreceived.  We are so constituted that we believe the most incrediblethings; and, once they are engraved upon the memory, woe to himwho would endeavour to efface them.

　　AUGUST 18.

　　Must it ever be thus, -- that the source of our happiness mustalso be the fountain of our misery?  The full and ardent sentimentwhich animated my heart with the love of nature, overwhelming mewith a torrent of delight, and which brought all paradise beforeme, has now become an insupportable torment, a demon which perpetuallypursues and harasses me.  When in bygone days I gazed from theserocks upon yonder mountains across the river, and upon the green,flowery valley before me, and saw alI nature budding and burstingaround; the hills clothed from foot to peak with tall, thick foresttrees; the valleys in all their varied windings, shaded with theloveliest woods; and the soft river gliding along amongst thelisping reeds, mirroring the beautiful clouds which the soft eveningbreeze wafted across the sky, -- when I heard the groves about memelodious with the music of birds, and saw the million swarms ofinsects dancing in the last golden beams of the sun, whose settingrays awoke the humming beetles from their grassy beds, whilst thesubdued tumult around directed my attention to the ground, and Ithere observed the arid rock compelled to yield nutriment to thedry moss, whilst the heath flourished upon the barren sands belowme, all this displayed to me the inner warmth which animates allnature, and filled and glowed within my heart.  I felt myselfexalted by this overflowing fulness to the perception of theGodhead, and the glorious forms of an infinite universe becamevisible to my soul!  Stupendous mountains encompassed me, abyssesyawned at my feet, and cataracts fell headlong down before me;impetuous rivers rolled through the plain, and rocks and mountainsresounded from afar.  In the depths of the earth I saw innumerablepowers in motion, and multiplying to infinity; whilst upon itssurface, and beneath the heavens, there teemed ten thousand varietiesof living creatures.  Everything around is alive with an infinitenumber of forms; while mankind fly for security to their pettyhouses, from the shelter of which they rule in their imaginationsover the wide-extended universe.  Poor fool! in whose pettyestimation all things are little.  From the inaccessible mountains,across the desert which no mortal foot has trod, far as the confinesof the unknown ocean, breathes the spirit of the eternal Creator;and every atom to which he has given existence finds favour in hissight.  Ah, how often at that time has the flight of a bird, soaringabove my head, inspired me with the desire of being transportedto the shores of the immeasurable waters, there to quaff thepleasures of life from the foaming goblet of the Infinite, and topartake, if but for a moment even, with the confined powers of mysoul, the beatitude of that Creator who accomplishes all thingsin himself, and through himself!

　　My dear friend, the bare recollection of those hours still consolesme.  Even this effort to recall those ineffable sensations, andgive them utterance, exalts my soul above itself, and makes medoubly feel the intensity of my present anguish.

　　It is as if a curtain had been drawn from before my eyes, and,instead of prospects of eternal life, the abyss of an ever opengrave yawned before me.  Can we say of anything that it existswhen all passes away, when time, with the speed of a storm, carriesall things onward, -- and our transitory existence, hurried alongby the torrent, is either swallowed up by the waves or dashedagainst the rocks?  There is not a moment but preys upon you, --and upon all around you, not a moment in which you do not yourselfbecome a destroyer.  The most innocent walk deprives of lifethousands of poor insects: one step destroys the fabric of theindustrious ant, and converts a little world into chaos.  No: itis not the great and rare calamities of the world, the floods whichsweep away whole villages, the earthquakes which swallow up ourtowns, that affect me.  My heart is wasted by the thought of thatdestructive power which lies concealed in every part of universalnature.  Nature has formed nothing that does not consume itself,and every object near it: so that, surrounded by earth and air,and all the active powers, I wander on my way with aching heart;and the universe is to me a fearful monster, for ever devouringits own offspring.

　　AUGUST 21.

　　In vain do I stretch out my arms toward her when I awaken in themorning from my weary slumbers.  In vain do I seek for her at nightin my bed, when some innocent dream has happily deceived me, andplaced her near me in the fields, when I have seized her hand andcovered it with countless kisses.  And when I feel for her in thehalf confusion of sleep, with the happy sense that she is near,tears flow from my oppressed heart; and, bereft of all comfort, Iweep over my future woes.

　　AUGUST 22.

　　What a misfortune, Wilhelm!  My active spirits have degeneratedinto contented indolence.  I cannot be idle, and yet I am unableto set to work.  I cannot think: I have no longer any feeling forthe beauties of nature, and books are distasteful to me.  Once wegive ourselves up, we are totally lost.  Many a time and oft Iwish I were a common labourer; that, awakening in the morning, Imight have but one prospect, one pursuit, one hope, for the daywhich has dawned.  I often envy Albert when I see him buried in aheap of papers and parchments, and I fancy I should be happy wereI in his place.  Often impressed with this feeling I have been onthe point of writing to you and to the minister, for the appointmentat the embassy, which you think I might obtain.  I believe I mightprocure it.  The minister has long shown a regard for me, and hasfrequently urged me to seek employment.  It is the business of anhour only.  Now and then the fable of the horse recurs to me.Weary of liberty, he suffered himself to be saddled and bridled,and was ridden to death for his pains.  I know not what to determineupon.  For is not this anxiety for change the consequence of thatrestless spirit which would pursue me equally in every situationof life?

　　AUGUST 28.

　　If my ills would admit of any cure, they would certainly be curedhere.  This is my birthday, and early in the morning I received apacket from Albert.  Upon opening it, I found one of the pinkribbons which Charlotte wore in her dress the first time I saw her,and which I had several times asked her to give me.  With it weretwo volumes in duodecimo of Wetstein's "Homer," a book I had oftenwished for, to save me the inconvenience of carrying the largeErnestine edition with me upon my walks.  You see how they anticipatemy wishes, how well they understand all those little attentionsof friendship, so superior to the costly presents of the great,which are humiliating.  I kissed the ribbon a thousand times, andin every breath inhaled the remembrance of those happy and irrevocabledays which filled me with the keenest joy.  Such, Wilhelm, is ourfate.  I do not murmur at it: the flowers of life are but visionary.How many pass away, and leave no trace behind -- how few yield anyfruit -- and the fruit itself, how rarely does it ripen! And yetthere are flowers enough! and is it not strange, my friend, thatwe should suffer the little that does really ripen, to rot, decay,and perish unenjoyed?  Farewell!  This is a glorious summer.  Ioften climb into the trees in Charlotte's orchard, and shake downthe pears that hang on the highest branches.  She stands below,and catches them as they fall.

　　AUGUST 3O.

　　Unhappy being that I am!  Why do I thus deceive myself?  What isto come of all this wild, aimless, endless passion?  I cannot prayexcept to her.  My imagination sees nothing but her: all surroundingobjects are of no account, except as they relate to her.  In thisdreamy state I enjoy many happy hours, till at length I feelcompelled to tear myself away from her.  Ah, Wilhelm, to whatdoes not my heart often compel me!  When I have spent several hoursin her company, till I feel completely absorbed by her figure, hergrace, the divine expression of her thoughts, my mind becomesgradually excited to the highest excess, my sight grows dim, myhearing confused, my breathing oppressed as if by the hand of amurderer, and my beating heart seeks to obtain relief for my achingsenses.  I am sometimes unconscious whether I really exist.  Ifin such moments I find no sympathy, and Charlotte does not allowme to enjoy the melancholy consolation of bathing her hand withmy tears, I feel compelled to tear myself from her, when I eitherwander through the country, climb some precipitous cliff, or forcea path through the trackless thicket, where I am lacerated andtorn by thorns and briers; and thence I find relief.  Sometimes Ilie stretched on the ground, overcome with fatigue and dying withthirst; sometimes, late in the night, when the moon shines aboveme, I recline against an aged tree in some sequestered forest, torest my weary limbs, when, exhausted and worn, I sleep till breakof day.  O Wilhelm! the hermit's cell, his sackcloth, and girdleof thorns would be luxury and indulgence compared with what I suffer.Adieu!  I see no end to this wretchedness except the grave.

　　SEPTEMBER 3.

　　I must away.  Thank you, Wilhelm, for determining my waveringpurpose.  For a whole fortnight I have thought of leaving her.  Imust away.  She has returned to town, and is at the house of afriend.  And then, Albert -- yes, I must go.

　　SEPTEMBER 1O.

　　Oh, what a night, Wilhelm!  I can henceforth bear anything.  Ishall never see her again.  Oh, why cannot I fall on your neck,and, with floods of tears and raptures, give utterance to all thepassions which distract my heart!  Here I sit gasping for breath,and struggling to compose myself.  I wait for day, and at sunrisethe horses are to be at the door.

　　And she is sleeping calmly, little suspecting that she has seen mefor the last time.  I am free.  I have had the courage, in aninterview of two hours' duration, not to betray my intention.  AndO Wilhelm, what a conversation it was!

　　Albert had promised to come to Charlotte in the garden immediatelyafter supper.  I was upon the terrace under the tall chestnut trees,and watched the setting sun.  I saw him sink for the last timebeneath this delightful valley and silent stream.  I had oftenvisited the same spot with Charlotte, and witnessed that glorioussight; and now -- I was walking up and down the very avenue whichwas so dear to me.  A secret sympathy had frequently drawn methither before I knew Charlotte; and we were delighted when, inour early acquaintance, we discovered that we each loved the samespot, which is indeed as romantic as any that ever captivated thefancy of an artist.

　　>From beneath the chestnut trees, there is an extensive view.  ButI remember that I have mentioned all this in a former letter, andhave described the tall mass of beech trees at the end, and howthe avenue grows darker and darker as it winds its way among them,till it ends in a gloomy recess, which has all the charm of amysterious solitude.  I still remember the strange feeling ofmelancholy which came over me the first time I entered that darkretreat, at bright midday.  I felt some secret foreboding that itwould, one day, be to me the scene of some happiness or misery.

　　I had spent half an hour struggling between the contending thoughtsof going and returning, when I heard them coming up the terrace.I ran to meet them.  I trembled as I took her hand, and kissed it.As we reached the top of the terrace, the moon rose from behindthe wooded hill.  We conversed on many subjects, and, withoutperceiving it, approached the gloomy recess.  Charlotte entered,and sat down.  Albert seated himself beside her.  I did the same,but my agitation did not suffer me to remain long seated.  I gotup, and stood before her, then walked backward and forward, andsat down again.  I was restless and miserable.  Charlotte drew ourattention to the beautiful effect of the moonlight, which threw asilver hue over the terrace in front of us, beyond the beech trees.It was a glorious sight, and was rendered more striking by thedarkness which surrounded the spot where we were.  We remained forsome time silent, when Charlotte observed, "Whenever I walk bymoonlight, it brings to my remembrance all my beloved and departedfriends, and I am filled with thoughts of death and futurity.  Weshall live again, Werther!" she continued, with a firm but feelingvoice; "but shall we know one another again what do you think?what do you say?"

　　"Charlotte," I said, as I took her hand in mine, and my eyes filledwith tears, "we shall see each other again -- here and hereafterwe shall meet again."  I could say no more.  Why, Wilhelm, shouldshe put this question to me, just at the monent when the fear ofour cruel separation filled my heart?

　　"And oh! do those departed ones know how we are employed here? dothey know when we are well and happy? do they know when we recalltheir memories with the fondest love?  In the silent hour ofevening the shade of my mother hovers around me; when seatedin the midst of my children, I see them assembled near me, asthey used to assemble near her; and then I raise my anxious eyesto heaven, and wish she could look down upon us, and witness howI fulfil the promise I made to her in her last moments, to be amother to her children.  With what emotion do I then exclaim,'Pardon, dearest of mothers, pardon me, if I do not adequatelysupply your place!  Alas!  I do my utmost.  They are clothed andfed; and, still better, they are loved and educated.  Could youbut see, sweet saint! the peace and harmony that dwells amongstus, you would glorify God with the warmest feelings of gratitude,to whom, in your last hour, you addressed such fervent prayers forour happiness.'"  Thus did she express herself; but O Wilhelm! whocan do justice to her language? how can cold and passionless wordsconvey the heavenly expressions of the spirit?  Albert interruptedher gently.  "This affects you too deeply, my dear Charlotte.  Iknow your soul dwells on such recollections wlth intense delight;but I implore -- "  "O Albert!" she continued, "I am sure you donot forget the evenings when we three used to sit at the littleround table, when papa was absent, and the little ones had retired.You often had a good book with you, but seldom read it; theconversation of that noble being was preferable to everything, --that beautiful, bright, gentle, and yet ever-toiling woman.  Godalone knows how I have supplicated with tears on my nightly couch,that I might be like her."

　　I threw myself at her feet, and, seizing her hand, bedewed it witha thousand tears.  "Charlotte!" I exclaimed, "God's blessing andyour mother's spirit are upon you."  "Oh! that you had known her,"she said, with a warm pressure of the hand. "She was worthy ofbeing known to you."  I thought I should have fainted: never hadI received praise so flattering.  She continued, "And yet she wasdoomed to die in the flower of her youth, when her youngest childwas scarcely six months old.  Her illness was but short, but shewas calm and resigned; and it was only for her children, especiallythe youngest, that she felt unhappy.  When her end drew nigh, shebade me bring them to her.  I obeyed.  The younger ones knew nothingof their approaching loss, while the elder ones were quite overcomewith grief.  They stood around the bed; and she raised her feeblehands to heaven, and prayed over them; then, kissing them in turn,she dismissed them, and said to me, 'Be you a mother to them.'  Igave her my hand.  'You are promising much, my child,' she said:'a mother's fondness and a mother's care!  I have often witnessed,by your tears of gratitude, that you know what is a mother'stenderness: show it to your brothers and sisters, and be dutifuland faithful to your father as a wife; you will be his comfort.'She inquired for him.  He had retired to conceal his intolerableanguish, -- he was heartbroken, "Albert, you were in the room.She heard some one moving: she inquired who it was, and desiredyou to approach.  She surveyed us both with a look of composureand satisfaction, expressive of her conviction that we should behappy, -- happy with one another."  Albert fell upon her neck, andkissed her, and exclaimed, "We are so, and we shall be so!" EvenAlbert, generally so tranquil, had quite lost his composure; andI was excited beyond expression.

　　"And such a being," She continued, "was to leave us, Werther!Great God, must we thus part with everything we hold dear in thisworld?  Nobody felt this more acutely than the children: they criedand lamented for a long time afterward, complaining that men hadcarried away their dear mamma."

　　Charlotte rose.  It aroused me; but I continued sitting, and heldher hand.  "Let us go," she said: "it grows late."  She attemptedto withdraw her hand: I held it still.  "We shall see each otheragain," I exclaimed: "we shall recognise each other under everypossible change!  I am going," I continued, "going willingly; but,should I say for ever, perhaps I may not keep my word.  Adieu,Charlotte; adieu, Albert.  We shall meet again."  "Yes: tomorrow,I think," she answered with a smile.  Tomorrow! how I felt the word!Ah! she little thought, when she drew her hand away from mine.They walked down the avenue.  I stood gazing after them in themoonlight.  I threw myself upon the ground, and wept: I then sprangup, and ran out upon the terrace, and saw, under the shade of thelinden-trees, her white dress disappearing near the garden-gate.I stretched out my arms, and she vanished.

　　BOOK II.

　　OCTOBER 2O.

　　We arrived here yesterday.  The ambassador is indisposed, and willnot go out for some days.  If he were less peevish and morose, allwould be well.  I see but too plainly that Heaven has destined meto severe trials; but courage! a light heart may bear anything.A light heart!  I smile to find such a word proceeding from my pen.A little more lightheartedness would render me the happiest beingunder the sun.  But must I despair of my talents and faculties,whilst others of far inferior abilities parade before me with theutmost self-satisfaction?  Gracious Providence, to whom I owe allmy powers, why didst thou not withhold some of those blessings Ipossess, and substitute in their place a feeling of self-confidenceand contentment?

　　But patience! all will yet be well; for I assure you, my dearfriend, you were right: since I have been obliged to associatecontinually with other people, and observe what they do, and howthey employ themselves, I have become far better satisfied withmyself.  For we are so constituted by nature, that we are everprone to compare ourselves with others; and our happiness or miserydepends very much on the objects and persons around us.  On thisaccount, nothing is more dangerous than solitude: there ourimagination, always disposed to rise, taking a new flight on thewings of fancy, pictures to us a chain of beings of whom we seemthe most inferior.  All things appear greater than they reallyare, and all seem superior to us.  This operation of the mind isquite natural: we so continually feel our own imperfections, andfancy we perceive in others the qualities we do not possess,attributing to them also all that we enjoy ourselves, that by thisprocess we form the idea of a perfect, happy man, -- a man, however,who only exists in our own imagination.

　　But when, in spite of weakness and disappointments, we set to workin earnest, and persevere steadily, we often find, that, thoughobliged continually to tack, we make more way than others who havethe assistance of wind and tide; and, in truth, there can be nogreater satisfaction than to keep pace with others or outstripthem in the race.

　　November 26.

　　I begin to find my situation here more tolerable, considering allcircumstances.  I find a great advantage in being much occupied;and the number of persons I meet, and their different pursuits,create a varied entertainment for me.  I have formed the acquaintanceof the Count C-- and I esteem him more and more every day.  He isa man of strong understanding and great discernment; but, thoughhe sees farther than other people, he is not on that account coldin his manner, but capable of inspiring and returning the warmestaffection.  He appeared interested in me on one occasion, when Ihad to transact some business with him.  He perceived, at the firstword, that we understood each other, and that he could conversewith me in a different tone from what he used with others.  Icannot sufficiently esteem his frank and open kindness to me.  Itis the greatest and most genuine of pleasures to observe a greatmind in sympathy with our own.

　　DECEMBER 24.

　　As I anticipated, the ambassador occasions me infinite annoyance.He is the most punctilious blockhead under heaven.  He doeseverything step by step, with the trifling minuteness of an oldwoman; and he is a man whom it is impossible to please, becausehe is never pleased with himself.  I like to do business regularlyand cheerfully, and, when it is finished, to leave it.  But heconstantly returns my papers to me, saying, "They will do," butrecommending me to look over them again, as "one may always improveby using a better word or a more appropriate particle."  I thenlose all patience, and wish myself at the devil's.  Not a conjunction,not an adverb, must be omitted: he has a deadly antipathy to allthose transpositions of which I am so fond; and, if the music ofour periods is not tuned to the established, official key, hecannot comprehend our meaning.  It is deplorable to be connectedwith such a fellow.

　　My acquaintance with the Count C-- is the only compensation forsuch an evil.  He told me frankly, the other day, that he was muchdispleased with the difficulties and delays of the ambassador;that people like him are obstacles, both to themselves and toothers.  "But," added he, "one must submit, like a traveller whohas to ascend a mountain: if the mountain was not there, the roadwould be both shorter and pleasanter; but there it is, and he mustget over it."

　　The old man perceives the count's partiality for me: this annoyshim, and, he seizes every opportunity to depreciate the count inmy hearing.  I naturally defend him, and that only makes mattersworse.  Yesterday he made me indignant, for he also alluded to me."The count," he said, "is a man of the world, and a good man ofbusiness: his style is good, and he writes with facility; but,like other geniuses, he has no solid learning."  He looked at mewith an expression that seemed to ask if I felt the blow.  But itdid not produce the desired effect: I despise a man who can thinkand act in such a manner.  However, I made a stand, and answeredwith not a little warmth.  The count, I said, was a man entitledto respect, alike for his character and his acquirements.  I hadnever met a person whose mind was stored with more useful andextensive knowledge, -- who had, in fact, mastered such an infinitevariety of subjects, and who yet retained all his activity for thedetails of ordinary business.  This was altogether beyond hiscomprehension; and I took my leave, lest my anger should be toohighly excited by some new absurdity of his.

　　And you are to blame for all this, you who persuaded me to bendmy neck to this yoke by preaching a life of activity to me.  Ifthe man who plants vegetables, and carries his corn to town onmarket-days, is not more usefully employed than I am, then let mework ten years longer at the galleys to which I am now chained.

　　Oh, the brilliant wretchedness, the weariness, that one is doomedto witness among the silly people whom we meet in society here!The ambition of rank!  How they watch, how they toil, to gainprecedence!  What poor and contemptible passions are displayed intheir utter nakedness!  We have a woman here, for example, whonever ceases to entertain the company with accounts of her familyand her estates.  Any stranger would consider her a silly being,whose head was turned by her pretensions to rank and property; butshe is in reality even more ridiculous, the daughter of a meremagistrate's clerk from this neighbourhood.  I cannot understandhow human beings can so debase themselves.

　　Every day I observe more and more the folly of judging of othersby ourselves; and I have so much trouble with myseif, and my ownheart is in such constant agitation, that I am well content to letothers pursue their own course, if they only allow me the sameprivilege.

　　What provokes me most is the unhappy extent to which distinctionsof rank are carried.  I know perfectly well how necessary areinequalities of condition, and I am sensible of the advantages Imyself derive therefrom; but I would not have these institutionsprove a barrier to the small chance of happiness which I may enjoyon this earth.

　　I have lately become acquainted with a Miss B--, a very agreeablegirl, who has retained her natural manners in the midst of artificiallife.  Our first conversation pleased us both equally; and, attaking leave, I requested permission to visit her.  She consentedin so obliging a manner, that I waited with impatience for thearrival of the happy moment.  She is not a native of this place,but resides here with her aunt.  The countenance of the old ladyis not prepossessing.  I paid her much attention, addressing thegreater part of my conversation to her; and, in less than half anhour, I discovered what her niece subsequently acknowledged to me,that her aged aunt, having but a small fortune, and a still smallershare of understanding, enjoys no satisfaction except in thepedigree of her ancestors, no protection save in her noble birth,and no enjoyment but in looking from her castle over the heads ofthe humble citizens.  She was, no doubt, handsome in her youth,and in her early years probably trifled away her time in renderingmany a poor youth the sport of her caprice: in her riper years shehas submitted to the yoke of a veteran officer, who, in return forher person and her small independence, has spent with her what wemay designate her age of brass.  He is dead; and she is now awidow, and deserted.  She spends her iron age alone, and would notbe approached, except for the loveliness of her niece.

　　JANUARY 8, 1772.

　　What beings are men, whose whole thoughts are occupied with formand ceremony, who for years together devote their mental andphysical exertions to the task of advancing themselves but onestep, and endeavouring to occupy a higher place at the table.  Notthat such persons would otherwise want employment: on the contrary,they give themselves much trouble by neglecting important businessfor such petty trifles.  Last week a question of precedence aroseat a sledging-party, and all our amusement was spoiled.

　　The silly creatures cannot see that it is not place which constitutesreal greatness, since the man who occupies the first place butseldom plays the principal part.  How many kings are governed bytheir ministers -- how many ministers by their secretaries?  Who, insuch cases, is really the chief?  He, as it seems to me, who cansee through the others, and possesses strength or skill enough tomake their power or passions subservient to the execution of hisown designs.

　　JANUARY 20.

　　I must write to you from this place, my dear Charlotte, from asmall room in a country inn, where I have taken shelter from asevere storm.  During my whole residence in that wretched placeD--, where I lived amongst strangers, -- strangers, indeed, tothis heart, -- I never at any time felt the smallest inclinationto correspond with you; but in this cottage, in this retirement,in this solitude, with the snow and hail beating against mylattice-pane, you are my first thought.  The instant I entered,your figure rose up before me, and the remembrance!  O my Charlotte,the sacred, tender remembrance!  Gracious Heaven! restore to methe happy moment of our first acquaintance.

　　Could you but see me, my dear Charlotte, in the whirl ofdissipation, -- how my senses are dried up, but my heart is at notime full.  I enjoy no single moment of happiness: all is vain --nothing touches me.  I stand, as it were, before the raree-show:I see the little puppets move, and I ask whether it is not anoptical illusion.  I am amused with these puppets, or, rather, Iam myself one of them: but, when I sometimes grasp my neighbour'shand, I feel that it is not natural; and I withdraw mine with ashudder.  In the evening I say I will enjoy the next morning'ssunrise, and yet I remain in bed: in the day I promise to rambleby moonlight; and I, nevertheless, remain at home.  I know not whyI rise, nor why I go to sleep.

　　The leaven which animated my existence is gone: the charm whichcheered me in the gloom of night, and aroused me from my morningslumbers, is for ever fled.

　　I have found but one being here to interest me, a Miss B--.  Sheresembles you, my dear Charlotte, if any one can possibly resembleyou.  "Ah!" you will say, "he has learned how to pay fine compliments."And this is partly true.  I have been very agreeable lately, asit was not in my power to be otherwise.  I have, moreover, a dealof wit: and the ladies say that no one understands flattery better,or falsehoods you will add; since the one accomplishment invariablyaccompanies the other.  But I must tell you of Miss B--.  She hasabundance of soul, which flashes from her deep blue eyes.  Herrank is a torment to her, and satisfies no one desire of her heart.She would gladly retire from this whirl of fashion, and we oftenpicture to ourselves a life of undisturbed happiness in distantscenes of rural retirement: and then we speak of you, my dearCharlotte; for she knows you, and renders homage to your merits;but her homage is not exacted, but voluntary, she loves you, anddelights to hear you made the subject of conversation.

　　Oh, that I were sitting at your feet in your favourite little room,with the dear children playing around us!  If they became troublesometo you, I would tell them some appalling goblin story; and theywould crowd round me with silent attention.  The sun is settingin glory; his last rays are shining on the snow, which covers theface of the country: the storm is over, and I must return to mydungeon.  Adieu!-- Is Albert with you? and what is he to you?  Godforgive the question.

　　FEBRUARY 8.

　　For a week past we have had the most wretched weather: but thisto me is a blessing; for, during my residence here, not a singlefine day has beamed from the heavens, but has been lost to me bythe intrusion of somebody.  During the severity of rain, sleet,frost, and storm, I congratulate myself that it cannot be worseindoors than abroad, nor worse abroad than it is within doors; andso I become reconciled.  When the sun rises bright in the morning,and promises a glorious day, I never omit to exclaim, "There, now,they have another blessing from Heaven, which they will be sureto destroy: they spoil everything, -- health, fame, happiness,amusement; and they do this generally through folly, ignorance,or imbecility, and always, according to their own account, withthe best intentions!"  I could often beseech them, on my bendedknees, to be less resolved upon their own destruction.

　　FEBRUARY 17.

　　I fear that my ambassador and I shall not continue much longertogether.  He is really growing past endurance.  He transactshis business in so ridiculous a manner, that I am often compelledto contradict him, and do things my own way; and then, of course,he thinks them very ill done.  He complained of me lately on thisaccount at court; and the minister gave me a reprimand, -- agentle one it is true, but still a reprimand.  In consequence ofthis, I was about to tender my resignation, when I received aletter, to which I submitted with great respect, on account of thehigh, noble, and generous spirit which dictated it.  He endeavouredto soothe my excessive sensibility, paid a tribute to my extremeideas of duty, of good example, and of perseverance in business,as the fruit of my youthful ardour, an impulse which he did notseek to destroy, but only to moderate, that it might have properplay and be productive of good.  So now I am at rest for anotherweek, and no longer at variance with myself.  Content and peaceof mind are valuable things: I could wish, my dear friend, thatthese precious jewels were less transitory.

　　FERRUARY 20.

　　God bless you, my dear friends, and may he grant you that happinesswhich he denies to me!

　　I thank you, Albert, for having deceived me.  I waited for thenews that your wedding-day was fixed; and I intended on that day,with solemnity, to take down Charlotte's profile from the wall,and to bury it with some other papers I possess.  You are nowunited, and her picture still remains here.  Well, let it remain!Why should it not?  I know that I am still one of your society,that I still occupy a place uninjured in Charlotte's heart, thatI hold the second place therein; and I intend to keep it.  Oh, Ishould become mad if she could forget!  Albert, that thought ishell!  Farewell, Albert farewell, angel of heaven farewell, Charlotte!

　　MARCH 15.

　　I have just had a sad adventure, which will drive me away fromhere.  I lose all patience! -- Death! -- It is not to be remedied;and you alone are to blame, for you urged and impelled me to filla post for which I was by no means suited.  I have now reason tobe satisfied, and so have you!  But, that you may not again attributethis fatality to my impetuous temper, I send you, my dear sir, aplain and simple narration of the affair, as a mere chronicler offacts would describe it.

　　The Count of O-- likes and distinguishes me.  It is well known,and I have mentioned this to you a hundred times.  Yesterday Idined with him.  It is the day on which the nobility are accustomedto assemble at his house in the evening.  I never once thought ofthe assembly, nor that we subalterns did not belong to such society.Well, I dined with the count; and, after dinner, we adjourned tothe large hall.  We walked up and down together: and I conversedwith him, and with Colonel B--, who joined us; and in this mannerthe hour for the assembly approached.  God knows, I was thinkingof nothing, when who should enter but the honourable Lady accompaniedby her noble husband and their silly, scheming daughter, with hersmall waist and flat neck; and, with disdainful looks and a haughtyair they passed me by.  As I heartily detest the whole race, Idetermined upon going away; and only waited till the count haddisengaged himself from their impertinent prattle, to take leave,when the agreeable Miss B-- came in.  As I never meet her withoutexperiencing a heartfelt pleasure, I stayed and talked to her,leaning over the back of her chair, and did not perceive, tillafter some time, that she seemed a little confused, and ceased toanswer me with her usual ease of manner.  I was struck with it."Heavens!" I said to myself, "can she, too, be like the rest?"  Ifelt annoyed, and was about to withdraw; but I remained,notwithstanding, forming excuses for her conduct, fancying she didnot mean it, and still hoping to receive some friendly recognition.The rest of the company now arrived. There was the Baron F --, inan entire suit that dated from the coronation of Francis I.; theChancellor N--, with his deaf wife; the shabbily-dressed I--, whoseold-fashioned coat bore evidence of modern repairs: this crownedthe whole.  I conversed with some of my acquaintances, but theyanswered me laconically.  I was engaged in observing Miss B--, anddid not notice that the women were whispering at the end of theroom, that the murmur extended by degrees to the men, that MadameS-- addressed the count with much warmth (this was all related tome subsequently by Miss B--); till at length the count came up tome, and took me to the window.  "You know our ridiculous customs,"he said.  "I perceive the company is rather displeased at yourbeing here.  I would not on any account--"  "I beg your excellency'spardon!" I exclaimed.  "I ought to have thought of this before,but I know you will forgive this little inattention.  I was going,"I added, "some time ago, but my evil genius detained me."  And Ismiled and bowed, to take my leave.  He shook me by the hand, ina manner which expressed everything.  I hastened at once from theillustrious assembly, sprang into a carriage, and drove to M--.I contemplated the setting sun from the top of the hill, and readthat beautiful passage in Homer, where Ulysses is entertained bythe hospitable herdsmen.  This was indeed delightful.

　　I returned home to supper in the evening.  But few persons wereassembled in the room.  They had turned up a corner of the table-cloth,and were playing at dice.  The good-natured A-- came in.  He laiddown his hat when he saw me, approached me, and said in a low tone,"You have met with a disagreeable adventure."  "I!" I exclaimed."The count obliged you to withdraw from the assembly!"  "Deucetake the assembly!" said I.  "I was very glad to be gone."  "I amdelighted," he added, "that you take it so lightly.  I am onlysorry that it is already so much spoken of."  The circumstancethen began to pain me. I fancied that every one who sat down, andeven looked at me, was thinking of this incident; and my heartbecame embittered.

　　And now I could plunge a dagger into my bosom, when I hear myselfeverywhere pitied, and observe the triumph of my enemies, who saythat this is always the case with vain persons, whose heads areturned with conceit, who affect to despise forms and such petty,idle nonsense.

　　Say what you will of fortitude, but show me the man who can patientlyendure the laughter of fools, when they have obtained an advantageover him.  'Tis only when their nonsense is without foundationthat one can suffer it without complaint.

　　March 16.

　　Everything conspires against me.  I met Miss B-- walking to-day.I could not help joining her; and, when we were at a little distancefrom her companions, I expressed my sense of her altered mannertoward me.  "O Werther!" she said, in a tone of emotion, "you, whoknow my heart, how could you so ill interpret my distress?  Whatdid I not suffer for you, from the moment you entered the room!I foresaw it all, a hundred times was I on the point of mentioningit to you.  I knew that the S--s and T--s, with their husbands,would quit the room, rather than remain in your company.  I knewthat the count would not break with them: and now so much is saidabout it."  "How!" I exclaimed, and endeavoured to conceal myemotion; for all that Adelin had mentioned to me yesterday recurredto me painfully at that moment.  "Oh, how much it has already costme!" said this amiable girl, while her eyes filled with tears.  Icould scarcely contain myself, and was ready to throw myself ather feet.  "Explain yourself!"  I cried.  Tears flowed down hercheeks.  I became quite frantic.  She wiped them away, withoutattempting to conceal them.  "You know my aunt," she continued;"she was present: and in what light does she consider the affair!Last night, and this morning, Werther, I was compelled to listento a lecture upon my, acquaintance with you.  I have been obligedto hear you condemned and depreciated; and I could not -- I darednot -- say much in your defence."

　　Every word she uttered was a dagger to my heart.  She did not feelwhat a mercy it would have been to conceal everything from me.She told me, in addition, all the impertinence that would be furthercirculated, and how the malicious would triumph; how they wouldrejoice over the punishment of my pride, over my humiliation forthat want of esteem for others with which I had often been reproached.To hear all this, Wilhelm, uttered by her in a voice of the mostsincere sympathy, awakened all my passions; and I am still in astate of extreme excitement.  I wish I could find a man to jeerme about this event.  I would sacrifice him to my resentment.  Thesight of his blood might possibly be a relief to my fury.  A hundredtimes have I seized a dagger, to give ease to this oppressed heart.Naturalists tell of a noble race of horses that instinctively opena vein with their teeth, when heated and exhausted by a long course,in order to breathe more freely.  I am often tempted to open avein, to procure for myself everlasting liberty.

　　MARCH 24.

　　I have tendered my resignation to the court.  I hope it will beaccepted, and you will forgive me for not having previously consultedyou.  It is necessary I should leave this place.  I know all youwill urge me to stay, and therefore I beg you will soften thisnews to my mother.  I am unable to do anything for myself: how,then, should I be competent to assist others?  It will afflict herthat I should have interrupted that career which would have mademe first a privy councillor, and then minister, and that I shouldlook behind me, in place of advancing.  Argue as you will, combineall the reasons which should have induced me to remain, I am going:that is sufficient.  But, that you may not be ignorant of mydestination, I may mention that the Prince of -- is here.  He ismuch pleased with my company; and, having heard of my intentionto resign, he has invited me to his country house, to pass thespring months with him. I shall be left completely my own master;and, as we agree on all subjects but one, I shall try my fortune,and accompany him.

　　APRIL l9.

　　Thanks for both your letters.  I delayed my reply, and withheldthis letter, till I should obtain an answer from the court.  Ifeared my mother might apply to the minister to defeat my purpose.But my request is granted, my resignation is accepted.  I shallnot recount with what reluctance it was accorded, nor relate whatthe minister has written: you would only renew your lamentations.The crown prince has sent me a present of five and twenty ducats;and, indeed, such goodness has affected me to tears.  For thisreason I shall not require from my mother the money for which Ilately applied.

　　MAY 5.

　　I leave this place to-morrow; and, as my native place is only sixmiles from the high road, I intend to visit it once more, andrecall the happy dreams of my childhood.  I shall enter at thesame gate through which I came with my mother, when, after myfather's death, she left that delightful retreat to immure herselfin your melancholy town.  Adieu, my dear friend: you shall hear ofmy future career.

　　MAY 9.

　　I have paid my visit to my native place with all the devotion ofa pilgrim, and have experienced many unexpected emotions.  Nearthe great elm tree, which is a quarter of a league from the village,I got out of the carriage, and sent it on before, that alone, andon foot, I might enjoy vividly and heartily all the pleasure ofmy recollections.  I stood there under that same elm which wasformerly the term and object of my walks.  How things have sincechanged!  Then, in happy ignorance, I sighed for a world I did notknow, where I hoped to find every pleasure and enjoyment which myheart could desire; and now, on my return from that wide world, Omy friend, how many disappointed hopes and unsuccessful plans haveI brought back!

　　As I contemplated the mountains which lay stretched out before me,I thought how often they had been the object of my dearest desires.Here used I to sit for hours together with my eyes bent upon them,ardently longing to wander in the shade of those woods, to losemyself in those valleys, which form so delightful an object in thedistance.  With what reluctance did I leave this charming spot;when my hour of recreation was over, and my leave of absenceexpired!  I drew near to the village: all the well-known oldsummerhouses and gardens were recognised again; I disliked the newones, and all other alterations which had taken place.  I enteredthe village, and all my former feelings returned.  I cannot, mydear friend, enter into details, charming as were my sensations:they would be dull in the narration.  I had intended to lodge inthe market-place, near our old house.  As soon as I entered, Iperceived that the schoolroom, where our childhood had been taughtby that good old woman, was converted into a shop.  I called tomind the sorrow, the heaviness, the tears, and oppression of heart,which I experienced in that confinement.  Every step produced someparticular impression.  A pilgrim in the Holy Land does not meetso many spots pregnant with tender recollections, and his soul ishardly moved with greater devotion.  One incident will serve forillustration.  I followed the course of a stream to a farm, formerlya delightful walk of mine, and paused at the spot, where, whenboys, we used to amuse ourselves making ducks and drakes upon thewater.  I recollected so well how I used formerly to watch thecourse of that same stream, following it with inquiring eagerness,forming romantic ideas of the countries it was to pass through;but my imagination was soon exhausted: while the water continuedflowing farther and farther on, till my fancy became bewilderedby the contemplation of an invisible distance.  Exactly such, mydear friend, so happy and so confined, were the thoughts of ourgood ancestors.  Their feelings and their poetry were fresh aschildhood.  And, when Ulysses talks of the immeasurable sea andboundless earth, his epithets are true, natural, deeply felt, andmysterious.  Of what importance is it that I have learned, withevery schoolboy, that the world is round?  Man needs but littleearth for enjoyment, and still less for his final repose.

　　I am at present with the prince at his hunting lodge.  He is a manwith whom one can live happily. He is honest and unaffected.  Thereare, however, some strange characters about him, whom I cannot atall understand.  They do not seem vicious, and yet they do notcarry the appearance of thoroughly honest men.  Sometimes I amdisposed to believe them honest, and yet I cannot persuade myselfto confide in them.  It grieves me to hear the prince occasionallytalk of things which he has only read or heard of, and always withthe same view in which they have been represented by others.

　　He values my understanding and talents more highly than my heart,but I am proud of the latter only.  It is the sole source ofeverything of our strength, happiness, and misery.  All the knowledgeI possess every one else can acquire, but my heart is exclusivelymy own.

　　MAY 25.

　　I have had a plan in my head of which I did not intend to speakto you until it was accomplished: now that it has failed, I mayas well mention it.  I wished to enter the army, and had long beendesirous of taking the step.  This, indeed, was the chief reasonfor my coming here with the prince, as he is a general in theservice.  I communicated my design to him during one of our walkstogether.  He disapproved of it, and it would have been actualmadness not to have listened to his reasons.

　　JUNE 11.

　　Say what you will, I can remain here no longer.  Why should Iremain?  Time hangs heavy upon my hands.  The prince is as graciousto me as any one could be, and yet I am not at my ease.  There is,indeed, nothing in common between us.  He is a man of understanding,but quite of the ordinary kind.  His conversation affords me nomore amusement than I should derive from the perusal of a well-writtenbook.  I shall remain here a week Ionger, and then start again onmy travels.  My drawings are the best things I have done since Icame here.  The prince has a taste for the arts, and would improveif his mind were not fettered by cold rules and mere technicalideas.  I often lose patience, when, with a glowing imagination,I am giving expression to art and nature, he interferes with learnedsuggestions, and uses at random the technical phraseology of artists.

　　JULY 16.

　　Once more I am a wanderer, a pilgrim, through the world.  But whatelse are you!

　　JULY 18.

　　Whither am I going?  I will tell you in confidence. I am obligedto continue a fortnight longer here, and then I think it would bebetter for me to visit the mines in --.  But I am only deludingmyself thus.  The fact is, I wish to be near Charlotte again, thatis all.  I smile at the suggestions of my heart, and obey itsdictates.

　　JULY 29.

　　No, no! it is yet well all is well!  I her husband!  O God, whogave me being, if thou hadst destined this happiness for me, mywhole life would have been one continual thanksgiving!  But I willnot murmur -- forgive these tears, forgive these fruitless wishes.She -- my wife!  Oh, the very thought of folding that dearest ofHeaven's creatures in my arms!  Dear Wilhelm, my whole frame feelsconvulsed when I see Albert put his arms around her slender waist!

　　And shall I avow it?  Why should I not, Wilhelm?  She would havebeen happier with me than with him.  Albert is not the man tosatisfy the wishes of such a heart.  He wants a certain sensibility;he wants -- in short, their hearts do not beat in unison.  Howoften, my dear friend, im reading a passage from some interestingbook, when my heart and Charlotte's seemed to meet, and in a hundredother instances when our sentiments were unfolded by the story ofsome fictitious character, have I felt that we were made for eachother!  But, dear Wilhelm, he loves her with his whole soul; andwhat does not such a love deserve?

　　I have been interrupted by an insufferable visit.  I have driedmy tears, and composed my thoughts.  Adieu, my best friend!

　　AUGUST 4.

　　I am not alone unfortunate.  All men are disappointed in theirhopes, and deceived in their expectations.  I have paid a visitto my good old woman under the lime-trees.  The eldest boy ranout to meet me: his exclamation of joy brought out his mother,but she had a very melancholy look.  Her first word was, "Alas!dear sir, my little John is dead."  He was the youngest of herchildren.  I was silent.  "And my husband has returned fromSwitzerland without any money; and, if some kind people had notassisted him, he must have begged his way home.  He was taken illwith fever on his journey."  I could answer nothing, but made thelittle one a present.  She invited me to take some fruit: I complied,and left the place with a sorrowful heart.

　　AUGUST 21.

　　My sensations are constantly changing.  Sometimes a happy prospectopens before me; but alas! it is only for a moment; and then, whenI am lost in reverie, I cannot help saying to myself, "If Albertwere to die? -- Yes, she would become -- and I should be" -- andso I pursue a chimera, till it leads me to the edge of a precipiceat which I shudder.

　　When I pass through the same gate, and walk along the same roadwhich first conducted me to Charlotte, my heart sinks within meat the change that has since taken place.  All, all, is altered!No sentiment, no pulsation of my heart, is the same.  My sensationsare such as would occur to some departed prince whose spirit shouldreturn to visit the superb palace which he had built in happy times,adorned with costly magnificence, and left to a beloved son, butwhose glory he should find departed, and its halls deserted andin ruins.

　　SEPTEMBER 3.

　　I sometimes cannot understand how she can love another, how shedares love another, when I love nothing in this world so completely,so devotedly, as I love her, when I know only her, and have noother possession.

　　SEPTEMBER 4.

　　It is even so!  As nature puts on her autumn tints it becomesautumn with me and around me.  My leaves are sere and yellow, andthe neighbouring trees are divested of their foliage.  Do youremember my writing to you about a peasant boy shortly after myarrival here?  I have just made inquiries about him in Walheim.They say he has been dismissed from his service, and is now avoidedby every one.  I met him yesterday on the road, going to aneighbouring village.  I spoke to him, and he told me his story.It interested me exceedingly, as you will easily understand whenI repeat it to you.  But why should I trouble you?  Why should Inot reserve all my sorrow for myself?  Why should I continue togive you occasion to pity and blame me?  But no matter: this alsois part of my destiny.

　　At first the peasant lad answered my inquiries with a sort ofsubdued melancholy, which seemed to me the mark of a timid disposition;but, as we grew to understand each other, he spoke with less reserve,and openly confessed his faults, and lamented his misfortune.  Iwish, my dear friend, I could give proper expression to hislanguage.  He told me with a sort of pleasurable recollection,that, after my departure, his passion for his mistress increaseddaily, until at last he neither knew what he did nor what he said,nor what was to become of him.  He could neither eat nor drink norsleep: he felt a sense of suffocation; he disobeyed all orders,and forgot all commands involuntarily; he seemed as if pursued byan evil spirit, till one day, knowing that his mistress had goneto an upper chamber, he had followed, or, rather, been drawn afterher.  As she proved deaf to his entreaties, he had recourse toviolence.  He knows not what happened; but he called God to witnessthat his intentions to her were honourable, and that he desirednothing more sincerely than that they should marry, and pass theirlives together.  When he had come to this point, he began tohesitate, as if there was something which he had not courage toutter, till at length he acknowledged with some confusion certainlittle confidences she had encouraged, and liberties she had allowed.He broke off two or three times in his narration, and assured memost earnestly that he had no wish to make her bad, as he termedit, for he loved her still as sincerely as ever; that the talehad never before escaped his lips, and was only now told to convinceme that he was not utterly lost and abandoned.  And here, my dearfriend, I must commence the old song which you know I utter eternally.If I could only represent the man as he stood, and stands nowbefore me, could I only give his true expressions, you would feelcompelled to sympathise in his fate.  But enough: you, who know mymisfortune and my disposition, can easily comprehend the attractionwhich draws me toward every unfortunate being, but particularlytoward him whose story I have recounted.

　　On perusing this letter a second time, I find I have omitted theconclusion of my tale; but it is easily supplied.  She becamereserved toward him, at the instigation of her brother who hadlong hated him, and desired his expulsion from the house, fearingthat his sister's second marriage might deprive his children ofthe handsome fortune they expected from her; as she is childless.He was dismissed at length; and the whole affair occasioned somuch scandal, that the mistress dared not take him back, even ifshe had wished it.  She has since hired another servant, with whom,they say, her brother is equally displeased, and whom she is likelyto marry; but my informant assures me that he himself is determinednot to survive such a catastrophe.

　　This story is neither exaggerated nor embellished: indeed, I haveweakened and impaired it in the narration, by the necessity ofusing the more refined expressions of society.

　　This love, then, this constancy, this passion, is no poeticalfiction.  It is actual, and dwells in its greatest purity amongstthat class of mankind whom we term rude, uneducated.  We are theeducated, not the perverted.  But read this story with attention,I implore you.  I am tranquil to-day, for I have been employedupon this narration: you see by my writing that I am not so agitatedas usual.  I read and re-read this tale, Wilhelm: it is the historyof your friend!  My fortune has been and will be similar; and Iam neither half so brave nor half so determined as the poor wretchwith whom I hesitate to compare myself.

　　SEPTEMBER 5.

　　Charlotte had written a letter to her husband in the country, wherehe was detained by business.  It commenced, "My dearest love,return as soon as possible: I await you with a thousand raptures."A friend who arrived, brought word, that, for certain reasons, hecould not return immediately.  Charlotte's letter was not forwarded,and the same evening it fell into my hands.  I read it, and smiled.She asked the reason. "What a heavenly treasure is imagination:"I exclaimed; "I fancied for a moment that this was written to me."She paused, and seemed displeased.  I was silent.

　　SEPTEMBER 6.

　　It cost me much to part with the blue coat which I wore the firsttime I danced with Charlotte.  But I could not possibly wear itany longer.  But I have ordered a new one, precisely similar, evento the collar and sleeves, as well as a new waistcoat and pantaloons.

　　But it does not produce the same effect upon me.  I know not howit is, but I hope in time I shall like it better.

　　SEPTEMBER 12.

　　She has been absent for some days.  She went to meet Albert.To-day I visited her: she rose to receive me, and I kissed herhand most tenderly.

　　A canary at the moment flew from a mirror, and settled upon hershoulder.  "Here is a new friend," she observed, while she madehim perch upon her hand: "he is a present for the children.  Whata dear he is!  Look at him!  When I feed him, he flutters with hiswings, and pecks so nicely.  He kisses me, too, only look!"

　　She held the bird to her mouth; and he pressed her sweet lips withso much fervour that he seemed to feel the excess of bliss whichhe enjoyed.

　　"He shall kiss you too," she added; and then she held the birdtoward me.  His little beak moved from her mouth to mine, and thedelightful sensation seemed like the forerunner of the sweetestbliss.

　　"A kiss," I observed, "does not seem to satisfy him: he wishes forfood, and seems disappointed by these unsatisfactory endearments."

　　"But he eats out of my mouth," she continued, and extended herlips to him containing seed; and she smiled with all the charm ofa being who has allowed an innocent participation of her love.

　　I turned my face away.  She should not act thus. She ought not toexcite my imagination with such displays of heavenly innocence andhappiness, nor awaken my heart from its slumbers, in which itdreams of the worthlessness of life!  And why not?  Because sheknows how much I love her.

　　SEPTEMBER 15.

　　It makes me wretched, Wilhelm, to think that there should be menincapable of appreciating the few things which possess a real valuein life.  You remember the walnut trees at S--, under which I usedto sit with Charlotte, during my visits to the worthy old vicar.Those glorious trees, the very sight of which has so often filledmy heart with joy, how they adorned and refreshed the parsonageyard, with their wide-extended branches! and how pleasing was ourremembrance of the good old pastor, by whose hands they wereplanted so many years ago: The schoolmaster has frequently mentionedhis name.  He had it from his grandfather.  He must have been amost excellent man; and, under the shade of those old trees, hismemory was ever venerated by me.  The schoolmaster informed usyesterday, with tears in his eyes, that those trees had been felled.Yes, cut to the ground!  I could, in my wrath, have slain themonster who struck the first stroke.  And I must endure this! --I, who, if I had had two such trees in my own court, and one haddied from old age, should have wept with real affliction.  Butthere is some comfort left, such a thing is sentiment, the wholevillage murmurs at the misfortune; and I hope the vicar's wifewill soon find, by the cessation of the villagers' presents, howmuch she has wounded the feelings of the neighborhhood.  It wasshe who did it, the wife of the present incumbent (our good oldman is dead), a tall, sickly creature who is so far right todisregard the world, as the world totally disregards her.  Thesilly being affects to be learned, pretends to examine the canonicalbooks, lends her aid toward the new-fashioned reformation ofChristendom, moral and critical, and shrugs up her shoulders atthe mention of Lavater's enthusiasm.  Her health is destroyed, onaccount of which she is prevented from having any enjoyment herebelow.  Only such a creature could have cut down my walnut trees!I can never pardon it.  Hear her reasons.  The falling leaves madethe court wet and dirty; the branches obstructed the light; boysthrew stones at the nuts when they were ripe, and the noise affectedher nerves; and disturbed her profound meditations, when she wasweighing the diffculties of Kennicot, Semler, and Michaelis.Finding that all the parish, particularly the old people, weredispleased, I asked "why they allowed it?"  "Ah, sir!" they replied,"when the steward orders, what can we poor peasants do?"  But onething has happened well.  The steward and the vicar (who, for once,thought to reap some advantage from the caprices of his wife)intended to divide the trees between them.  The revenue-office,being informed of it, revived an old claim to the ground where thetrees had stood, and sold them to the best bidder.  There theystill lie on the ground.  If I were the sovereign, I should knowhow to deal with them all, vicar, steward, and revenue-office.Sovereign, did I say?  I should, in that case, care little aboutthe trees that grew in the country.

　　OCTOBER 10.

　　Only to gaze upon her dark eyes is to me a source of happiness!And what grieves me, is, that Albert does not seem so happy as he-- hoped to be -- as I should have been -- if -- I am no friendto these pauses, but here I cannot express it otherwise; andprobably I am explicit enough.

　　OCTOBER 12.

　　Ossian has superseded Homer in my heart.  To what a world doesthe illustrious bard carry me!  To wander over pathless wilds,surrounded by impetuous whirlwinds, where, by the feeble lightof the moon, we see the spirits of our ancestors; to hear fromthe mountain-tops, mid the roar of torrents, their plaintivesounds issuing from deep caverns, and the sorrowful lamentationsof a maiden who sighs and expires on the mossy tomb of the warriorby whom she was adored.  I meet this bard with silver hair; hewanders in the valley; he seeks the footsteps of his fathers, and,alas! he finds only their tombs.  Then, contemplating the palemoon, as she sinks beneath the waves of the rolling sea, the memoryof bygone days strikes the mind of the hero, days when approachingdanger invigorated the brave, and the moon shone upon his barkladen with spoils, and returning in triumph.  When I read in hiscountenance deep sorrow, when I see his dying glory sink exhaustedinto the grave, as he inhales new and heart-thrilling delightfrom his approaching union with his beloved, and he casts a lookon the cold earth and the tall grass which is so soon to cover him,and then exclaims, "The traveller will come, -- he will come whohas seen my beauty, and he will ask, 'Where is the bard, where isthe illustrious son of Fingal?'  He will walk over my tomb, andwill seek me in vain!"  Then, O my friend, I could instantly, likea true and noble knight, draw my sword, and deliver my prince fromthe long and painful languor of a living death, and dismiss my ownsoul to follow the demigod whom my hand had set free!

　　OCTOBER 19.

　　Alas! the void the fearful void, which I feel in my bosom!  SometimesI think, if I could only once but once, press her to my heart, thisdreadful void would be filled.

　　OCTOBER 26.

　　Yes, I feel certain, Wilhelm, and every day I become more certain,that the existence of any being whatever is of very little consequence.A friend of Charlotte's called to see her just now.  I withdrewinto a neighbouring apartment, and took up a book; but, finding Icould not read, I sat down to write.  I heard them converse in anundertone: they spoke upon indifferent topics, and retailed thenews of the town.  One was going to be married; another was ill,very ill, she had a dry cough, her face was growing thinner daily,and she had occasional fits.  "N-- is very unwell too," saidCharlotte.  "His limbs begin to swell already," answered the other;and my lively imagination carried me at once to the beds of theinfirm.  There I see them struggling against death, with all theagonies of pain and horror; and these women, Wilhelm, talk of allthis with as much indifference as one would mention the death ofa stranger.  And when I look around the apartment where I now am-- when I see Charlotte's apparel lying before me, and Albert'swritings, and all those articles of furniture which are so familiarto me, even to the very inkstand which I am using, -- when I thinkwhat I am to this family -- everything.  My friends esteem me; I oftencontribute to their happiness, and my heart seems as if it couldnot beat without them; and yet --- if I were to die, if I wereto be summoned from the midst of this circle, would they feel --or how long would they feel the void which my loss would make intheir existence?  How long!  Yes, such is the frailty of man, thateven there, where he has the greatest consciousness of his ownbeing, where he makes the strongest and most forcible impression,even in the memory, in the heart, of his beloved, there also hemust perish, -- vanish, -- and that quickly.

　　OCTOBER 27.

　　I could tear open my bosom with vexation to think how little weare capable of influencing the feelings of each other.  No onecan communicate to me those sensations of love, joy, rapture, anddelight which I do not naturally possess; and, though my heart mayglow with the most lively affection, I cannot make the happinessof one in whom the same warmth is not inherent.

　　OCTOBER 27: Evening.

　　I possess so much, but my love for her absorbs it all.  I possessso much, but without her I have nothing.

　　OCTOBER 30.

　　One hundred times have I been on the point of embracing her.Heavens! what a torment it is to see so much loveliness passingand repassing before us, and yet not dare to lay hold of it!And laying hold is the most natural of human instincts.  Do notchildren touch everything they see?  And I!

　　NOVEMBER 3.

　　Witness, Heaven, how often I lie down in my bed with a wish, andeven a hope, that I may never awaken again.  And in the morning,when I open my eyes, I behold the sun once more, and am wretched.If I were whimsical, I might blame the weather, or an acquaintance,or some personal disappointment, for my discontented mind; and thenthis insupportable load of trouble would not rest entirely uponmyself.  But, alas!  I feel it too sadly.  I am alone the causeof my own woe, am I not?  Truly, my own bosom contains the sourceof all my sorrow, as it previously contained the source of all mypleasure.  Am I not the same being who once enjoyed an excess ofhappiness, who, at every step, saw paradise open before him, andwhose heart was ever expanded toward the whole world?  And thisheart is now dead, no sentiment can revive it; my eyes are dry;and my senses, no more refreshed by the influence of soft tears,wither and consume my brain.  I suffer much, for I have lost theonly charm of life: that active, sacred power which created worldsaround me, -- it is no more.  When I look from my window at thedistant hills, and behold the morning sun breaking through themists, and illuminating the country around, which is still wrappedin silence, whilst the soft stream winds gently through the willows,which have shed their leaves; when glorious nature displays allher beauties before me, and her wondrous prospects are ineffectualto extract one tear of joy from my withered heart, I feel that insuch a moment I stand like a reprobate before heaven, hardened,insensible, and unmoved.  Oftentimes do I then bend my knee to theearth, and implore God for the blessing of tears, as the despondinglabourer in some scorching climate prays for the dews of heavento moisten his parched corn.

　　But I feel that God does not grant sunshine or rain to ourimportunate entreaties.  And oh, those bygone days, whose memorynow torments me! why were they so fortunate?  Because I thenwaited with patience for the blessings of the Eternal, and receivedhis gifts with the grateful feelings of a thankful heart.

　　NOVEMBER 8.

　　Charlotte has reproved me for my excesses, with so much tendernessand goodness!  I have lately been in the habit of drinking morewine than heretofore.  "Don't do it," she said.  "Think of Charlotte!""Think of you!" I answered; "need you bid me do so?  Think of you-- I do not think of you: you are ever before my soul!  This verymorning I sat on the spot where, a few days ago, you descendedfrom the carriage, and--"  She immediately changed the subject toprevent me from pursuing it farther.  My dear friend, my energiesare all prostrated: she can do with me what she pleases.

　　NOVEMBER 15.

　　I thank you, Wilhelm, for your cordial sympathy, for your excellentadvice; and I implore you to be quiet.  Leave me to my sufferings.In spite of my wretchedness, I have still strength enough forendurance.  I revere religion -- you know I do.  I feel that itcan impart strength to the feeble and comfort to the afflicted,but does it affect all men equally?  Consider this vast universe:you will see thousands for whom it has never existed, thousandsfor whom it will never exist, whether it be preached to them, ornot; and must it, then, necessarily exist for me?  Does not theSon of God himself say that they are his whom the Father has givento him?  Have I been given to him?  What if the Father will retainme for himself, as my heart sometimes suggests?  I pray you, donot misinterpret this.  Do not extract derision from my harmlesswords.  I pour out my whole soul before you.  Silence were otherwisepreferable to me, but I need not shrink from a subject of whichfew know more than I do myself.  What is the destiny of man, butto fill up the measure of his sufferings, and to drink his allottedcup of bitterness?  And if that same cup proved bitter to the Godof heaven, under a human form, why should I affect a foolish pride,and call it sweet?  Why should I be ashamed of shrinking at thatfearful moment, when my whole being will tremble between existenceand annihilation, when a remembrance of the past, like a flash oflightning, will illuminate the dark gulf of futurity, when everythingshall dissolve around me, and the whole world vanish away?  Is notthis the voice of a creature oppressed beyond all resource,self-deficient, about to plunge into inevitable destruction, andgroaning deeply at its inadequate strength, "My God! my God! whyhast thou forsaken me?"  And should I feel ashamed to utter thesame expression?  Should I not shudder at a prospect which had itsfears, even for him who folds up the heavens like a garment?

　　NOVEMBER 21.

　　She does not feel, she does not know, that she is preparing a poisonwhich will destroy us both; and I drink deeply of the draught whichis to prove my destruction.  What mean those looks of kindness withwhich she often -- often? no, not often, but sometimes, regards me,that complacency with which she hears the involuntary sentimentswhich frequently escape me, and the tender pity for my sufferingswhich appears in her countenance?

　　Yesterday, when I took leave she seized me by the hand, and said,"Adieu, dear Werther."  Dear Werther!  It was the first time sheever called me dear: the sound sunk deep into my heart.  I haverepeated it a hundred times; and last night, on going to bed, andtalking to myself of various things, I suddenly said, "Good night,dear Werther!" and then could not but laugh at myself.

　　NOVEMBER 22

　　I cannot pray, "Leave her to me !" and yet she often seems tobelong to me.  I cannot pray, "Give her to me!" for she isanother's.  In this way I affect mirth over my troubles; and,if I had time, I could compose a whole litany of antitheses.

　　NOVEMBER 24.

　　She is sensible of my sufferings.  This morning her look piercedmy very soul.  I found her alone, and she was silent: she steadfastlysurveyed me.  I no longer saw in her face the charms of beauty orthe fire of genius: these had disappeared.  But I was affected byan expression much more touching, a look of the deepest sympathyand of the softest pity.  Why was I afraid to throw myself at herfeet?  Why did I not dare to take her in my arms, and answer herby a thousand kisses?  She had recourse to her piano for relief,and in a low and sweet voice accompanied the music with delicioussounds.  Her lips never appeared so lovely: they seemed but justto open, that they might imbibe the sweet tones which issued fromthe instrument, and return the heavenly vibration from her lovelymouth.  Oh! who can express my sensations?  I was quite overcome,and, bending down, pronounced this vow: "Beautiful lips, which theangels guard, never will I seek to profane your purity with a kiss."And yet, my friend, oh, I wish -- but my heart is darkened by doubtand indecision -- could I but taste felicity, and then die to expiatethe sin!  What sin?

　　NOVEMBER 26.

　　Oftentimes I say to myself, "Thou alone art wretched: all othermortals are happy, none are distressed like thee!"  Then I reada passage in an ancient poet, and I seem to understand my ownheart.  I have so much to endure!  Have men before me ever beenso wretched?

　　NOVEMBER 30.

　　I shall never be myself again!  Wherever I go, some fatality occursto distract me.  Even to-day alas -- for our destiny! alas forhuman nature!

　　About dinner-time I went to walk by the river-side, for I had noappetite.  Everything around seemed gloomy: a cold and damp easterlywind blew from the mountains, and black, heavy clouds spread overthe plain.  I observed at a distance a man in a tattered coat: hewas wandering among the rocks, and seemed to be looking for plants.When I approached, he turned round at the noise; and I saw thathe had an interesting countenance in which a settled melancholy,strongly marked by benevolence, formed the principal feature.His long black hair was divided, and flowed over his shoulders.As his garb betokened a person of the lower order, I thought hewould not take it ill if I inquired about his business; and Itherefore asked what he was seeking.  He replied, with a deep sigh,that he was looking for flowers, and could find none.  "But it isnot the season," I observed, with a smile.  "Oh, there are so manyflowers!" he answered, as he came nearer to me.  "In my gardenthere are roses and honeysuckles of two sorts: one sort was givento me by my father! they grow as plentifully as weeds; I have beenlooking for them these two days, and cannot find them.  There areflowers out there, yellow, blue, and red; and that centaury has avery pretty blossom: but I can find none of them."  I observed hispeculiarity, and therefore asked him, with an air of indifference,what he intended to do with his flowers.  A strange smile overspreadhis countenance.  Holding his finger to his mouth, he expressed ahope that I would not betray him; and he then informed me that hehad promised to gather a nosegay for his mistress.  "That is right,"said I.  "Oh!" he replied, "she possesses many other things aswell: she is very rich."  "And yet," I continued, "she likes yournosegays."  "Oh, she has jewels and crowns!" he exclaimed.  I askedwho she was.  "If the states-general would but pay me," he added,"I should be quite another man. Alas! there was a time when I wasso happy; but that is past, and I am now--"  He raised his swimmingeyes to heaven.  "And you were happy once?"  I observed.  "Ah,would I were so still!" was his reply.  "I was then as gay andcontented as a man can be."  An old woman, who was coming towardus, now called out, "Henry, Henry! where are you?  We have beenlooking for you everywhere: come to dinner."  "Is he your son?"I inquired, as I went toward her. "Yes," she said: "he is my poor,unfortunate son.  The Lord has sent me a heavy affliction."  I askedwhether he had been long in this state.  She answered, "He has beenas calm as he is at present for about six months.  I thank Heaventhat he has so far recovered: he was for one whole year quite raving,and chained down in a madhouse.  Now he injures no one, but talksof nothing else than kings and queens.  He used to be a very good,quiet youth, and helped to maintain me; he wrote a very fine hand;but all at once he became melancholy, was seized with a violentfever, grew distracted, and is now as you see.  If I were only totell you, sir--"  I interrupted her by asking what period it wasin which he boasted of having been so happy.  "Poor boy!" sheexclaimed, with a smile of cormpassion, "he means the time whenhe was completely deranged, a time he never ceases to regret,when he was in the madhouse, and unconscious of everything."  Iwas thunderstruck: I placed a piece of money in her hand, andhastened away.

　　"You were happy!"  I exclaimed, as I returned quickly to thetown, "'as gay and contented as a man can be!'"  God of heaven!and is this the destiny of man?  Is he only happy before he hasacquired his reason, or after he has lost it?  Unfortunate being!And yet I envy your fate: I envy the delusion to which you are avictim.  You go forth with joy to gather flowers for your princess,-- in winter, -- and grieve when you can find none, and cannotunderstand why they do not grow.  But I wander forth without joy,without hope, without design; and I return as I came.  You fancywhat a man you would be if the states general paid you.  Happymortal, who can ascribe your wretchedness to an earthly cause!You do not know, you do not feel, that in your own distractedheart and disordered brain dwells the source of that unhappinesswhich all the potentates on earth cannot relieve.

　　Let that man die unconsoled who can deride the invalid for undertakinga journey to distant, healthful springs, where he often finds onlya heavier disease and a more painful death, or who can exult overthe despairing mind of a sinner, who, to obtain peace of conscienceand an alleviation of misery, makes a pilgrimage to the HolySepulchre.  Each laborious step which galls his wounded feet inrough and untrodden paths pours a drop of balm into his troubledsoul, and the journey of many a weary day brings a nightly reliefto his anguished heart.  Will you dare call this enthusiasm, yecrowd of pompous declaimers?  Enthusiasm!  0 God! thou seest mytears.  Thou hast allotted us our portion of misery: must we alsohave brethren to persecute us, to deprive us of our consolation,of our trust in thee, and in thy love and mercy?  For our trust inthe virtue of the healing root, or in the strength of the vine,what is it else than a belief in thee from whom all that surroundsus derives its healing and restoring powers?  Father, whom I knownot, -- who wert once wont to fill my soul, but who now hidest thyface from me, -- call me back to thee; be silent no longer; thysilence shall not delay a soul which thirsts after thee.  What man,what father, could be angry with a son for returning to him suddenly,for falling on his neck, and exclaiming, "I am here again, myfather! forgive me if I have anticipated my journey, and returnedbefore the appointed time!  The world is everywhere the same, --a scene of labour and pain, of pleasure and reward; but what doesit all avail?  I am happy only where thou art, and in thy presenceam I content to suffer or enjoy."  And wouldst thou, heavenly Father,banish such a child from thy presence?

　　DECEMBER 1.

　　Wilhelm, the man about whom I wrote to you -- that man so enviablein his misfortunes -- was secretary to Charlotte's father; and anunhappy passion for her which he cherished, concealed, and atlength discovered, caused him to be dismissed from his situation.This made him mad.  Think, whilst you peruse this plain narration,what an impression the circumstance has made upon me!  But it wasrelated to me by Albert with as much calmness as you will probablyperuse it.

　　DECEMBER 4.

　　I implore your attention.  It is all over with me.  I can supportthis state no longer.  To-day I was sitting by Charlotte.  She wasplaying upon her piano a succession of delightful melodies, withsuch intense expression!  Her little sister was dressing her dollupon my lap.  The tears came into my eyes.  I leaned down, andlooked intently at her wedding-ring: my tears fell -- immediatelyshe began to play that favourite, that divine, air which has sooften enchanted me.  I felt comfort from a recollection of thepast, of those bygone days when that air was familiar to me; andthen I recalled all the sorrows and the disappointments which Ihad since endured.  I paced with hasty strides through the room,my heart became convulsed with painful emotions.  At length Iwent up to her, and exclaimed With eagerness, "For Heaven's sake,play that air no longer!"  She stopped, and looked steadfastly atme.  She then said, with a smile which sunk deep into my heart,"Werther, you are ill: your dearest food is distasteful to you.But go, I entreat you, and endeavour to compose yourself."  Itore myself away.  God, thou seest my torments, and wilt end them!

　　DECEMBER 6.

　　How her image haunts me!  Waking or asleep, she fills my entiresoul!  Soon as I close my eyes, here, in my brain, where all thenerves of vision are concentrated, her dark eyes are imprinted.Here -- I do not know how to describe it; but, if I shut my eyes,hers are immediately before me: dark as an abyss they open uponme, and absorb my senses.

　　And what is man -- that boasted demigod?  Do not his powers failwhen he most requires their use?  And whether he soar in joy, orsink in sorrow, is not his career in both inevitably arrested?And, whilst he fondly dreams that he is grasping at infinity,does he not feel compelled to return to a consciousness of hiscold, monotonous existence?

　　THE EDITOR TO THE READER.

　　It is a matter of extreme regret that we want original evidenceof the last remarkable days of our friend; and we are, therefore,obliged to interrupt the progress of his correspondence, and tosupply the deficiency by a connected narration.

　　I have felt it my duty to collect accurate information from themouths of persons well acquainted with his history.  The storyis simple; and all the accounts agree, except in some unimportantparticulars.  It is true, that, with respect to the characters ofthe persons spoken of, opinions and judgments vary.

　　We have only, then, to relate conscientiously the facts which ourdiligent labour has enabled us to collect, to give the lettersof the deceased, and to pay particular attention to the slightestfragment from his pen, more especially as it is so difficult todiscover the real and correct motives of men who are not of thecommon order.

　　Sorrow and discontent had taken deep root in Werther's soul, andgradually imparted their character to his whole being.  The harmonyof his mind became completely disturbed; a perpetual excitementand mental irritation, which weakened his natural powers, producedthe saddest etfects upon him, and rendered him at length the victimof an exhaustion against which he struggled with still more painfulefforts than he had displayed, even in contending with his othermisfortunes.  His mental anxiety weakened his various good qualities;and he was soon converted into a gloomy companion, always unhappyand unjust in his ideas, the more  wretched he became.  This was,at least, the opinion of Albert's friends.  They assert, moreover,that the character of Albert himself had undergone no change inthe meantime: he was still the same being whom Werther had loved,honoured, and respected from the commencement.  His love forCharlotte was unbounded: he was proud of her, and desired thatshe should be recognised by every one as the noblest of createdbeings.  Was he, however, to blame for wishing to avert from herevery appearance of suspicion? or for his unwillingness to sharehis rich prize with another, even for a moment, and in the mostinnocent manner?  It is asserted that Albert frequently retiredfrom his wife's apartment during Werther's visits; but this didnot arise from hatred or aversion to his friend, but only from afeeling that his presence was oppressive to Werther.

　　Charlotte's father, who was confined to the house by indisposition,was accustomed to send his carriage for her, that she might makeexcursions in the neighbourhood.  One day the weather had beenunusually severe, and the whole country was covered with snow.

　　Werther went for Charlotte the following morning, in order that,if Albert were absent, he might conduct her home.

　　The beautiful weather produced but little impression on his troubledspirit.  A heavy weight lay upon his soul, deep melancholy hadtaken possession of him, and his mind knew no change save from onepainful thought to another.

　　As he now never enjoyed internal peace, the condition of his fellowcreatures was to him a perpetual source of trouble and distress.He believed he had disturbed the happiness of Albert and his wife;and, whilst he censured himself strongly for this, he began toentertain a secret dislike to Albert.

　　His thoughts were occasionally directed to this point.  "Yes," hewould repeat to himself, with ill-concealed dissatisfaction, "yes,this is, after all, the extent of that confiding, dear, tender,and sympathetic love, that calm and eternal fidelity!  What do Ibehold but satiety and indifference?  Does not every frivolousengagement attract him more than his charming and lovely wife?Does he know how to prize his happiness?  Can he value her as shedeserves?  He possesses her, it is true, I know that, as I knowmuch more, and I have become accustomed to the thought that hewill drive me mad, or, perhaps, murder me.  Is his friendshiptoward me unimpaired?  Does he not view my attachment to Charlotteas an infringement upon his rights, and consider my attention toher as a silent rebuke to himself?  I know, and indeed feel, thathe dislikes me, that he wishes for my absence, that my presenceis hateful to him."

　　He would often pause when on his way to visit Charlotte, standstill, as though in doubt, and seem desirous of returning, butwould nevertheless proceed; and, engaged in such thoughts andsoliloquies as we have described, he finally reached the hunting-lodge,with a sort of involuntary consent.

　　Upon one occasion he entered the house; and, inquiring forCharlotte, he observed that the inmates were in a state ofunusual confusion.  The eldest boy informed him that a dreadfulmisfortune had occurred at Walheim, -- that a peasant had beenmurdered!  But this made little impression upon him.  Enteringthe apartment, he found Charlotte engaged reasoning with her father,who, in spite of his infirmity, insisted on going to the scene ofthe crime, in order to institute an inquiry.  The criminal wasunknown; the victim had been found dead at his own door thatmorning.  Suspicions were excited: the murdered man had been inthe service of a widow, and the person who had previously filledthe situation had been dismissed from her employment.

　　As soon as Werther heard this, he exclaimed with great excitement,"Is it possible!  I must go to the spot -- I cannot delay a moment!"He hastened to Walheim.  Every incident returned vividly to hisremembrance; and he entertained not the slightest doubt that thatman was the murderer to whom he had so often spoken, and for whomhe entertained so much regard.  His way took him past the well-knownlime trees, to the house where the body had been carried; and hisfeelings were greatly excited at the sight of the fondly recollectedspot.  That threshold where the neighbours' children had so oftenplayed together was stained with blood; love and attachment, thenoblest feelings of human nature, had been converted into violenceand murder.  The huge trees stood there leafless and covered withhoarfrost; the beautiful hedgerows which surrounded the oldchurchyard wall were withered; and the gravestones, half coveredwith snow, were visible through the openings.

　　As he approached the inn, in front of which the whole village wasassembled, screams were suddenly heard.  A troop of armed peasantswas seen approaching, and every one exclaimed that the criminalhad been apprehended.  Werther looked, and was not long in doubt.The prisoner was no other than the servant, who had been formerlyso attached to the widow, and whom he had met prowling about, withthat suppressed anger and ill-concealed despair, which we havebefore described.

　　"What have you done, unfortunate man?" inquired Werther, as headvanced toward the prisoner.  The latter turned his eyes upon himin silence, and then replied with perfect composure; "No one willnow marry her, and she will marry no one."  The prisoner was takeninto the inn, and Werther left the place.  The mind of Werther wasfearfully excited by this shocking occurrence.  He ceased, however,to be oppressed by his usual feeling of melancholy, moroseness,and indifference to everything that passed around him.  He entertaineda strong degree of pity for the prisoner, and was seized with anindescribable anxiety to save him from his impending fate.  Heconsidered him so unfortunate, he deemed his crime so excusable,and thought his own condition so nearly similar, that he feltconvinced he could make every one else view the matter in the lightin which he saw it himself.  He now became anxious to undertakehis defence, and commenced composing an eloquent speech for theoccasion; and, on his way to the hunting-lodge, he could not refrainfrom speaking aloud the statement which he resolved to make to thejudge.

　　Upon his arrival, he found Albert had been before him: and he wasa little perplexed by this meeting; but he soon recovered himself,and expressed his opinion with much warmth to the judge.  Thelatter shook, his head doubtingly; and although Werther urged hiscase with the utmost zeal, feeling, and determination in defenceof his client, yet, as we may easily suppose, the judge was notmuch influenced by his appeal.  On the contrary, he interruptedhim in his address, reasoned with him seriously, and even administereda rebuke to him for becoming the advocate of a murderer.  Hedemonstrated, that, according to this precedent, every law mightbe violated, and the public security utterly destroyed.  He added,moreover, that in such a case he could himself do nothing,without incurring the greatest responsibility; that everythingmust follow in the usual course, and pursue the ordinary channel.

　　Werther, however, did not abandon his enterprise, and even besoughtthe judge to connive at the flight of the prisoner.  But thisproposal was peremptorily rejected.  Albert, who had taken somepart in the discussion, coincided in opinion with the judge.  Atthis Werther became enraged, and took his leave in great anger,after the judge had more than once assured him that the prisonercould not be saved.

　　The excess of his grief at this assurance may be inferred from anote we have found amongst his papers, and which was doubtlesswritten upon this very occasion.

　　"You cannot be saved, unfortunate man!  I see clearly that wecannot be saved!"

　　Werther was highly incensed at the observations which Albert hadmade to the judge in this matter of the prisoner.  He thought hecould detect therein a little bitterness toward himself personally;and although, upon reflection, it could not escape his soundjudgment that their view of the matter was correct, he felt thegreatest possible reluctance to make such an admission.

　　A memorandum of Werther's upon this point, expressive of his generalfeelings toward Albert, has been found amongst his papers.

　　"What is the use of my continually repeating that he is a good andestimable man?  He is an inward torment to me, and I am incapableof being just toward him."

　　One fine evening in winter, when the weather seemed inclined tothaw, Charlotte and Albert were returning home together.  Theformer looked from time to time about her, as if she missed Werther'scompany.  Albert began to speak of him, and censured him for hisprejudices.  He alluded to his unfortunate attachment, and wishedit were possible to discontinue his acquaintance. "I desire it onour own account," he added; "and I request you will compel him toalter his deportment toward you, and to visit you less frequently.The world is censorious, and I know that here and there we arespoken of."  Charlotte made no reply, and Albert seemed to feelher silence.  At least, from that time he never again spoke ofWerther; and, when she introduced the subject, he allowed theconversation to die away, or else he directed the discourse intoanother channel.

　　The vain attempt Werther had made to save the unhappy murderer wasthe last feeble glimmering of a flame about to be extinguished.He sank almost immediately afterward into a state of gloom andinactivity, until he was at length brought to perfect distractionby learning that he was to be summoned as a witness against theprisoner, who asserted his complete innocence.

　　His mind now became oppressed by the recollection of every misfortuneof his past life.  The mortification he had suffered at theambassador's, and his subsequent troubles, were revived in hismemory.  He became utterly inactive.  Destitute of energy, he wascut off from every pursuit and occupation which compose the businessof common life; and he became a victim to his own susceptibility,and to his restless passion for the most amiable and beloved ofwomen, whose peace he destroyed.  In this unvarying monotony ofexistence his days were consumed; and his powers became exhaustedwithout aim or design, until they brought him to a sorrowful end.

　　A few letters which he left behind, and which we here subjoin,afford the best proofs of his anxiety of mind and of the depthof his passion, as well as of his doubts and struggles, and ofhis weariness of life.

　　DECEMBER 12.

　　Dear Wilhelm, I am reduced to the condition of those unfortunatewretches who believe they are pursued by an evil spirit.  SometimesI am oppressed, not by apprehension or fear, but by an inexpressibleinternal sensation, which weighs upon my heart, and impedes mybreath!  Then I wander forth at night, even in this tempestuousseason, and feel pleasure in surveying the dreadful scenes aroundme.

　　Yesterday evening I went forth.  A rapid thaw had suddenly setin: I had been informed that the river had risen, that the brookshad all overflowed their banks, and that the whole vale of Walheimwas under water!  Upon the stroke of twelve I hastened forth.  Ibeheld a fearful sight.  The foaming torrents rolled from themountains in the moonlight, -- fields and meadows, trees andhedges, were confounded together; and the entire valley wasconverted into a deep lake, which was agitated by the roaringwind!  And when the moon shone forth, and tinged the black cloudswith silver, and the impetuous torrent at my feet foamed and resoundedwith awful and grand impetuosity, I was overcome by a mingled sensationof apprehension and delight.  With extended arms I looked down intothe yawning abyss, and cried, "Plunge!'" For a moment my sensesforsook me, in the intense delight of ending my sorrows and mysufferings by a plunge into that gulf!  And then I felt as if Iwere rooted to the earth, and incapable of seeking an end to mywoes!  But my hour is not yet come: I feel it is not.  O Wilhelm,how willingly could I abandon my existence to ride the whirlwind,or to embrace the torrent! and then might not rapture perchance bethe portion of this liberated soul?

　　I turned my sorrowful eyes toward a favourite spot, where I wasaccustomed to sit with Charlotte beneath a willow after a fatiguingwalk.  Alas! it was covered with water, and with difficulty I foundeven the meadow.  And the fields around the hunting-lodge, thoughtI.  Has our dear bower been destroyed by this unpitying storm?And a beam of past happiness streamed upon me, as the mind of acaptive is illumined by dreams of flocks and herds and bygone joysof home!  But I am free from blame.  I have courage to die!  PerhapsI have, -- but I still sit here, like a wretched pauper, who collectsfagots, and begs her bread from door to door, that she may prolongfor a few days a miserable existence which she is unwilling to resign.

　　DECEMBER 15.

　　What is the matter with me, dear Wilhelm?  I am afraid of myself!Is not my love for her of the purest, most holy, and most brotherlynature?  Has my soul ever been sullied by a single sensual desire?but I will make no protestations.  And now, ye nightly visions,how truly have those mortals understood you, who ascribe yourvarious contradictory effects to some invincible power!  This nightI tremble at the avowal -- I held her in my arms, locked in a closeembrace: I pressed her to my bosom, and covered with countlesskisses those dear lips which murmured in reply soft protestationsof love.  My sight became confused by the delicious intoxicationof her eyes.  Heavens! is it sinful to revel again in such happiness,to recall once more those rapturous moments with intense delight?Charlotte!  Charlotte!  I am lost!  My senses are bewildered, myrecollection is confused, mine eyes are bathed in tears -- I amill; and yet I am well -- I wish for nothing -- I have no desires-- it were better I were gone.

　　Under the circumstances narrated above, a determination to quitthis world had now taken fixed possession of Werther's soul.  SinceCharlotte's return, this thought had been the final object of allhis hopes and wishes; but he had resolved that such a step shouldnot be taken with precipitation, but with calmness and tranquillity,and with the most perfect deliberation.

　　His troubles and internal struggles may be understood from thefollowing fragment, which was found, without any date, amongsthis papers, and appears to have formed the beginning of a letterto Wilhelm.

　　"Her presence, her fate, her sympathy for me, have power still toextract tears from my withered brain.

　　"One lifts up the curtain, and passes to the other side, -- thatis all!  And why all these doubts and delays?  Because we know notwhat is behind -- because there is no returning -- and because ourmind infers that all is darkness and confusion, where we havenothing but uncertainty."

　　His appearance at length became quite altered by the effect ofhis melancholy thoughts; and his resolution was now finally andirrevocably taken, of which the following ambiguous letter, whichhe addressed to his friend, may appear to afford some proof.

　　DECEMBER 2O.

　　I am grateful to your love, Wilhelm, for having repeated youradvice so seasonably.  Yes, you are right: it is undoubtedlybetter that I should depart.  But I do not entirely approve yourscheme of returning at once to your neighbourhood; at least, Ishould Iike to make a little excursion on the way, particularlyas we may now expect a continued frost, and consequently goodroads.  I am much pleased with your intention of coming to fetchme; only delay your journey for a fortnight, and wait for anotherletter from me.  One should gather nothing before it is ripe, anda fortnight sooner or later makes a great difference.  Entreat mymother to pray for her son, and tell her I beg her pardon for allthe unhappiness I have occasioned her.  It has ever been my fateto give pain to those whose happiness I should have promoted.Adieu, my dearest friend.  May every blessing of Heaven attendyou!  Farewell.

　　We find it difficult to express the emotions with which Charlotte'ssoul was agitated during the whole of this time, whether in relationto her husband or to her unfortunate friend; although we are enabled,by our knowledge of her character, to understand their nature.

　　It is certain that she had formed a determination, by every meansin her power to keep Werther at a distance; and, if she hesitatedin her decision, it was from a sincere feeling of friendly pity,knowing how much it would cost him, indeed, that he would find italmost impossible to comply with her wishes.  But various causesnow urged her to be firm.  Her hushand preserved a strict silenceabout the whole matter; and she never made it a subject ofconversation, feeling bound to prove to him by her conduct thather sentiments agreed with his.

　　The same day, which was the Sunday before Christmas, after Wertherhad written the last-mentioned letter to his friend, he came inthe evening to Charlotte's house, and found her alone.  She wasbusy preparing some little gifts for her brothers and sisters,which were to be distributed to them on Christmas Day.  He begantalking of the delight of the children, and of that age when thesudden appearance of the Christmas-tree, decorated with fruit andsweetmeats, and lighted up with wax candles, causes such transportsof joy.  "You shall have a gift too, if you behave well," saidCharlotte, hiding her embarrassment under sweet smile.  "And whatdo you call behaving well?  What should I do, what can I do, mydear Charlotte?" said he.  "Thursday night," she answered, "isChristmas Eve.  The children are all to be here, and my father too:there is a present for each; do you come likewise, but do not comebefore that time."  Werther started.  "I desire you will not: it mustbe so," she continued.  "I ask it of you as a favour, for my ownpeace and tranquillity.  We cannot go on in this manner any longer."He turned away his face walked hastily up and down the room, mutteringindistinctly, "We cannot go on in this manner any longer!"  Charlotte,seeing the violent agitation into which these words had thrown him,endeavoured to divert his thoughts by different questions, but in vain."No, Charlotte!" he exclaimed; "I will never see you any more!""And why so?" she answered. "We may -- we must see each otheragain; only let it be with more discretion.  Oh! why were you bornwith that excessive, that ungovernable passion for everything thatis dear to you?"  Then, taking his hand, she said, "I entreat ofyou to be more calm: your talents, your understanding, your genius,will furnish you with a thousand resources.  Be a man, and conqueran unhappy attachment toward a creature who can do nothing but pityyou."  He bit his lips, and looked at her with a gloomy countenance.She continued to hold his hand.  "Grant me but a moment's patience,Werther," she said.  "Do you not see that you are deceiving yourself,that you are seeking your own destruction?  Why must you love me,me only, who belong to another?  I fear, I much fear, that it isonly the impossibility of possessing me which makes your desire forme so strong."  He drew back his hand, whilst he surveyed her witha wild and angry look.  "'Tis well!" he exclaimed, "'tis very well!Did not Albert furnish you with this reflection?  It is profound,a very profound remark."  "A reflection that any one might easilymake," she answered; "and is there not a woman in the whole worldwho is at liberty, and has the power to make you happy?  Conqueryourself: look for such a being, and believe me when I say that youwill certainly find her.  I have long felt for you, and for us all:you have confined yourself too long within the limits of too narrowa circle.  Conquer yourself; make an effort: a short journey willbe of service to you.  Seek and find an object worthy of your love;then return hither, and let us enjoy together all the happiness ofthe most perfect friendship."

　　"This speech," replied Werther with a cold smile, "this speechshould be printed, for the benefit of all teachers.  My dearCharlotte, allow me but a short time longer, and all will be well.""But however, Werther," she added, "do not come again beforeChristmas."  He was about to make some answer, when Albert came in.They saluted each other coldly, and with mutual embarrassment pacedup and down the room.  Werther made some common remarks; Albertdid the same, and their conversation soon dropped.  Albert askedhis wife about some household matters; and, finding that hiscommissions were not executed, he used some expressions which, toWerther's ear, savoured of extreme harshness.  He wished to go,but had not power to move; and in this situation he remained tilleight o'clock, his uneasiness and discontent continually increasing.At length the cloth was laid for supper, and he took up his hatand stick.  Albert invited him to remain; but Werther, fancyingthat he was merely paying a formal compliment, thanked him coldly,amd left the house.

　　Werther returned home, took the candle from his servant, and retiredto his room alone.  He talked for some time with great earnestnessto himself, wept aloud, walked in a state of great excitementthrough his chamber; till at length, without undressing, he threwhimself on the bed, where he was found by his servant at eleveno'clock, when the latter ventured to enter the room, and take offhis boots.  Werther did not prevent him, but forbade him to come inthe morning till he should ring.

　　On Monday morning, the 21st of December, he wrote to Charlotte thefollowing letter, which was found, sealed, on his bureau after hisdeath, and was given to her.  I shall insert it in fragments; asit appears, from several circumstances, to have been written inthat manner.

　　"It is all over, Charlotte: I am resolved to die!  I make thisdeclaration deliberately and coolly, without any romantic passion,on this morning of the day when I am to see you for the last time.At the moment you read these lines, O best of women, the cold gravewill hold the inanimate remains of that restless and unhappy beingwho, in the last moments of his existence, knew no pleasure sogreat as that of conversing with you!  I have passed a dreadfulnight or rather, let me say, a propitious one; for it has givenme resolution, it has fixed my purpose.  I am resolved to die.When I tore myself from you yesterday, my senses were in tumultand disorder; my heart was oppressed, hope and pleasure had fledfrom me for ever, and a petrifying cold had seized my wretchedbeing.  I could scarcely reach my room.  I threw myself on my knees;and Heaven, for the last time, granted me the consolation ofshedding tears.  A thousand ideas, a thousand schemes, arose withinmy soul; till at length one last, fixed, final thought tookpossession of my heart.  It was to die.  I lay down to rest; andin the morning, in the quiet hour of awakening, the same determinationwas upon me.  To die!  It is not despair: it is conviction that Ihave filled up the measure of my sufferings, that I have reachedmy appointed term, and must sacrifice myself for thee.  Yes,Charlotte, why should I not avow it?  One of us three must die:it shall be Werther.  O beloved Charlotte! this heart, excited byrage and fury, has often conceived the horrid idea of murderingyour husband -- you -- myself!  The lot is cast at length.  Andin the bright, quiet evenings of summer, when you sometimes wandertoward the mountains, let your thoughts then turn to me: recollecthow often you have watched me coming to meet you from the valley;then bend your eyes upon the churchyard which contains my grave,and, by the light of the setting sun, mark how the evening breezewaves the tall grass which grows above my tomb.  I was calm whenI began this letter, but the recollection of these scenes makesme weep like a child."

　　About ten in the morning, Werther called his servant, and, whilsthe was dressing, told him that in a few days he intended to setout upon a journey, and bade him therefore lay his clothes inorder, and prepare them for packing up, call in all his accounts,fetch home the books he had lent, and give two months' pay to thepoor dependants who were accustomed to receive from him a weeklyallowance.

　　He breakfasted in his room, and then mounted his horse, and wentto visit the steward, who, however, was not at home.  He walkedpensively in the garden, and seemed anxious to renew all the ideasthat were most painful to him.

　　The children did not suffer him to remain alone long.  They followedhim, skipping and dancing before him, and told him, that afterto-morrow and tomorrow and one day more, they were to receive theirChristmas gift from Charlotte; and they then recounted all thewonders of which they had formed ideas in their child imaginations."Tomorrow and tomorrow," said he, "and one day more!"  And hekissed them tenderly.  He was going; but the younger boy stoppedhim, to whisper something in his ear.  He told him that his elderbrothers had written splendid New-Year's wishes so large! one forpapa, and another for Albert and Charlotte, and one for Werther;and they were to be presented early in the morning, on New Year'sDay.  This quite overcame him.  He made each of the children apresent, mounted his horse, left his compliments for papa andmamma, and, with tears in his eyes, rode away from the place.

　　He returned home about five o'clock, ordered his servant to keepup his fire, desired him to pack his books and linen at the bottomof the trunk, and to place his coats at the top.  He then appearsto have made the following addition to the letter addressed toCharlotte:

　　"You do not expect me.  You think I will obey you, and not visityou again till Christmas Eve.  O Charlotte, today or never!  OnChristmas Eve you will hold this paper in your hand; you willtremble, and moisten it with your tears.  I will -- I must!  Oh, howhappy I feel to be determined!"

　　In the meantime, Charlotte was in a pitiable state of mind.  Afterher last conversation with Werther, she found how painful to herselfit would be to decline his visits, and knew how severely he wouldsuffer from their separation.

　　She had, in conversation with Albert, mentioned casually that Wertherwould not return before Christmas Eve; and soon afterward Albertwent on horseback to see a person in the neighbourhood, with whomhe had to transact some business which would detain him all night.

　　Charlotte was sitting alone.  None of her family were near, andshe gave herself up to the reflections that silently took possessionof her mind.  She was for ever united to a husband whose love andfidelity she had proved, to whom she was heartily devoted, and whoseemed to be a special gift from Heaven to ensure her happiness.On the other hand, Werther had become dear to her.  There was acordial unanimity of sentiment between them from the very firsthour of their acquaintance, and their long association and repeatedinterviews had made an indelible impression upon her heart.  Shehad been accustomed to communicate to him every thought and feelingwhich interested her, and his absence threatened to open a voidin her existence which it might be impossible to fill.  How heartilyshe wished that she might change him into her brother, -- that shecould induce him to marry one of her own friends, or could reestablishhis intimacy with Albert.

　　She passed all her intimate friends in review before her mind, butfound something objectionable in each, and could decide upon noneto whom she would consent to give him.

　　Amid all these considerations she felt deeply but indistinctlythat her own real but unexpressed wish was to retain him for herself,and her pure and amiable heart felt from this thought a sense ofoppression which seemed to forbid a prospect of happiness.  Shewas wretched: a dark cloud obscured her mental vision.

　　It was now half-past six o'clock, and she heard Werther's step onthe stairs.  She at once recognised his voice, as he inquired ifshe were at home.  Her heart beat audibly -- we could almost sayfor the first time -- at his arrival.  It was too late to denyherself; and, as he entered, she exclaimed, with a sort of illconcealed confusion, "You have not kept your word!"  "I promisednothing," he answered.  "But you should have complied, at leastfor my sake," she continued. " I implore you, for both our sakes."

　　She scarcely knew what she said or did; and sent for some friends,who, by their presence, might prevent her being left alone withWerther.  He put down some books he had brought with him, thenmade inquiries about some others, until she began to hope that herfriends might arrive shortly, entertaining at the same time adesire that they might stay away.

　　At one moment she felt anxious that the servant should remain inthe adjoining room, then she changed her mind.  Werther, meanwhile,walked impatiently up and down.  She went to the piano, anddetermined not to retire.  She then collected her thoughts, andsat down quietly at Werther's side, who had taken his usual placeon the sofa.

　　"Have you brought nothing to read?" she inquired.  He had nothing."There in my drawer," she continued, "you will find your owntranslation of some of the songs of Ossian.  I have not yet readthem, as I have still hoped to hear you recite them; but, for sometime past, I have not been able to accomplish such a wish."  Hesmiled, and went for the manuscript, which he took with a shudder.He sat down; and, with eyes full of tears, he began to read.

　　"Star of descending night! fair is thy light in the west! thouliftest thy unshorn head from thy cloud; thy steps are stately onthy hill.  What dost thou behold in the plain?  The stormy windsare laid.  The murmur of the torrent comes from afar.  Roaringwaves climb the distant rock.  The flies of evening are on theirfeeble wings: the hum of their course is on the field.  What dostthou behold, fair light?  But thou dost smile and depart.  Thewaves come with joy around thee: they bathe thy lovely hair.Farewell, thou silent beam!  Let the light of Ossian's soul arise!

　　"And it does arise in its strength!  I behold my departed friends.Their gathering is on Lora, as in the days of other years.  Fingalcomes like a watery column of mist! his heroes are around: andsee the bards of song, gray-haired Ullin! stately Ryno! Alpin withthe tuneful voice: the soft complaint of Minona!  How are ye changed,my friends, since the days of Selma's feast! when we contended,like gales of spring as they fly along the hill, and bend by turnsthe feebly whistling grass.

　　"Minona came forth in her beauty, with downcast look and tearfuleye.  Her hair was flying slowly with the blast that rushedunfrequent from the hill.  The souls of the heroes were sad whenshe raised the tuneful voice.  Oft had they seen the grave ofSalgar, the dark dwelling of white-bosomed Colma.  Colma left aloneon the hill with all her voice of song!  Salgar promised to come!but the night descended around.  Hear the voice of Colma, when shesat alone on the hill!

　　"Colma.  It is night: I am alone, forlorn on the hill of storms.The wind is heard on the mountain.  The torrent is howling downthe rock.  No hut receives me from the rain: forlorn on the hillof winds!

　　"Rise moon! from behind thy clouds.  Stars of the night, arise!Lead me, some light, to the place where my love rests from thechase alone!  His bow near him unstrung, his dogs panting aroundhim!  But here I must sit alone by the rock of the mossy stream.The stream and the wind roar aloud.  I hear not the voice of mylove!  Why delays my Salgar; why the chief of the hill his promise?Here is the rock and here the tree! here is the roaring stream!Thou didst promise with night to be here.  Ah! whither is my Salgargone?  With thee I would fly from my father, with thee from mybrother of pride.  Our race have long been foes: we are not foes,O Salgar!

　　"Cease a little while, O wind! stream, be thou silent awhile! letmy voice be heard around! let my wanderer hear me!  Salgar! it isColma who calls.  Here is the tree and the rock.  Salgar, my love,I am here!  Why delayest thou thy coming?  Lo! the calm moon comesforth.  The flood is bright in the vale.  The rocks are gray onthe steep.  I see him not on the brow.  His dogs come not beforehim with tidings of his near approach.  Here I must sit alone!

　　"Who lie on the heath beside me?  Are they my love and my brother?Speak to me, O my friends!  To Colma they give no reply.  Speakto me: I am alone!  My soul is tormented with fears.  Ah, they aredead!  Their swords are red from the fight.  O my brother! mybrother! why hast thou slain my Salgar!  Why, O Salgar, hast thouslain my brother!  Dear were ye both to me! what shall I say inyour praise?  Thou wert fair on the hill among thousands! he wasterrible in fight!  Speak to me! hear my voice! hear me, sons ofmy love!  They are silent! silent for ever!  Cold, cold, are theirbreasts of clay!  Oh, from the rock on the hill, from the top ofthe windy steep, speak, ye ghosts of the dead!  Speak, I will notbe afraid!  Whither are ye gone to rest?  In what cave of the hillshall I find the departed?  No feeble voice is on the gale: noanswer half drowned in the storm!

　　"I sit in my grief: I wait for morning in my tears!  Rear the tomb,ye friends of the dead.  Close it not till Colma come.  My lifeflies away like a dream.  Why should I stay behind?  Here shall Irest with my friends, by the stream of the sounding rock.  Whennight comes on the hill when the loud winds arise my ghost shallstand in the blast, and mourn the death of my friends.  The huntershall hear from his booth; he shall fear, but love my voice!  Forsweet shall my voice be for my friends: pleasant were her friendsto Colma.

　　"Such was thy song, Minona, softly blushing daughter of Torman.Our tears descended for Colma, and our souls were sad!  Ullin camewith his harp; he gave the song of Alpin.  The voice of Alpin waspleasant, the soul of Ryno was a beam of fire!  But they had restedin the narrow house: their voice had ceased in Selma!  Ullin hadreturned one day from the chase before the heroes fell.  He heardtheir strife on the hill: their song was soft, but sad!  Theymourned the fall of Morar, first of mortal men!  His soul was likethe soul of Fingal: his sword like the sword of Oscar.  But hefell, and his father mourned: his sister's eyes were full of tears.Minona's eyes were full of tears, the sister of car-borne Morar.She retired from the song of Ullin, like the moon in the west,when she foresees the shower, and hides her fair head in a cloud.I touched the harp with Ullin: the song of morning rose!

　　"Ryno.  The wind and the rain are past, calm is the noon of day.The clouds are divided in heaven.  Over the green hills flies theinconstant sun.  Red through the stony vale comes down the streamof the hill.  Sweet are thy murmurs, O stream! but more sweet isthe voice I hear.  It is the voice of Alpin, the son of song,mourning for the dead!  Bent is his head of age: red his tearfuleye.  Alpin, thou son of song, why alone on the silent hill? whycomplainest thou, as a blast in the wood as a wave on the lonelyshore?

　　"Alpin.  My tears, O Ryno! are for the dead my voice for thosethat have passed away.  Tall thou art on the hill; fair among thesons of the vale.  But thou shalt fall like Morar: the mournershall sit on thy tomb.  The hills shall know thee no more: thy bowshall lie in thy hall unstrung!

　　"Thou wert swift, O Morar! as a roe on the desert: terrible as ameteor of fire.  Thy wrath was as the storm.  Thy sword in battleas lightning in the field.  Thy voice was as a stream after rain,like thunder on distant hills.  Many fell by thy arm: they wereconsumed in the flames of thy wrath.  But when thou didst returnfrom war, how peaceful was thy brow.  Thy face was like the sunafter rain: like the moon in the silence of night: calm as thebreast of the lake when the loud wind is laid.

　　"Narrow is thy dwelling now! dark the place of thine abode!  Withthree steps I compass thy grave, O thou who wast so great before!Four stones, with their heads of moss, are the only memorial ofthee.  A tree with scarce a leaf, long grass which whistles in thewind, mark to the hunter's eye the grave of the mighty Morar.Morar! thou art low indeed.  Thou hast no mother to mourn thee,no maid with her tears of love.  Dead is she that brought theeforth.  Fallen is the daughter of Morglan.

　　"Who on his staff is this?  Who is this whose head is white withage, whose eyes are red with tears, who quakes at every step?  Itis thy father, O Morar! the father of no son but thee.  He heardof thy fame in war, he heard of foes dispersed.  He heard of Morar'srenown, why did he not hear of his wound?  Weep, thou father ofMorar!  Weep, but thy son heareth thee not.  Deep is the sleep ofthe dead, low their pillow of dust.  No more shall he hear thyvoice, no more awake at thy call.  When shall it be morn in thegrave, to bid the slumberer awake?  Farewell, thou bravest of men!thou conqueror in the field!  but the field shall see thee no more,nor the dark wood be lightened with the splendour of thy steel.Thou has left no son.  The song shall preserve thy name.  Futuretimes shall hear of thee they shall hear of the fallen Morar!

　　"The grief of all arose, but most the bursting sigh of Armin.  Heremembers the death of his son, who fell in the days of his youth.Carmor was near the hero, the chief of the echoing Galmal.  Whyburst the sigh of Armin? he said.  Is there a cause to mourn?  Thesong comes with its music to melt and please the soul.  It is likesoft mist that, rising from a lake, pours on the silent vale;the green flowers are filled with dew, but the sun returns in hisstrength, and the mist is gone.  Why art thou sad, O Armin, chiefof sea-surrounded Gorma?

　　"Sad I am! nor small is my cause of woe!  Carmor, thou hast lostno son; thou hast lost no daughter of beauty.  Colgar the valiantlives, and Annira, fairest maid.  The boughs of thy house ascend,O Carmor! but Armin is the last of his race.  Dark is thy bed, ODaura! deep thy sleep in the tomb!  When shalt thou wake with thysongs? with all thy voice of music?

　　"Arise, winds of autumn, arise: blow along the heath.  Streams ofthe mountains, roar; roar, tempests in the groves of my oaks!  Walkthrough broken clouds, O moon! show thy pale face at intervals;bring to my mind the night when all my children fell, when Arindalthe mighty fell -- when Daura the lovely failed.  Daura, my daughter,thou wert fair, fair as the moon on Fura, white as the driven snow,sweet as the breathing gale.  Arindal, thy bow was strong, thy spearwas swift on the field, thy look was like mist on the wave, thyshield a red cloud in a storm!  Armar, renowned in war, came andsought Daura's love.  He was not long refused: fair was the hopeof their friends.

　　"Erath, son of Odgal, repined: his brother had been slain by Armar.He came disguised like a son of the sea: fair was his cliff on thewave, white his locks of age, calm his serious brow.  Fairest ofwomen, he said, lovely daughter of Armin! a rock not distant inthe sea bears a tree on its side; red shines the fruit afar.  ThereArmar waits for Daura.  I come to carry his love! she went shecalled on Armar.  Nought answered, but the son of the rock.  Armar,my love, my love! why tormentest thou me with fear?  Hear, son ofArnart, hear! it is Daura who calleth thee.  Erath, the traitor,fled laughing to the land.  She lifted up her voice-- she calledfor her brother and her father.  Arindal!  Armin! none to relieveyou, Daura.

　　"Her voice came over the sea.  Arindal, my son, descended from thehill, rough in the spoils of the chase.  His arrows rattled by hisside; his bow was in his hand, five dark-gray dogs attended hissteps.  He saw fierce Erath on the shore; he seized and bound himto an oak.  Thick wind the thongs of the hide around his limbs;he loads the winds with his groans.  Arindal ascends the deep inhis boat to bring Daura to land.  Armar came in his wrath, andlet fly the gray-feathered shaft.  It sung, it sunk in thy heart,O Arindal, my son! for Erath the traitor thou diest.  The oar isstopped at once: he panted on the rock, and expired.  What is thygrief, O Daura, when round thy feet is poured thy brother's blood.The boat is broken in twain.  Armar plunges into the sea to rescuehis Daura, or die.  Sudden a blast from a hill came over the waves;he sank, and he rose no more.

　　"Alone, on the sea-beat rock, my daughter was heard to complain;frequent and loud were her cries.  What could her father do?  Allnight I stood on the shore: I saw her by the faint beam of the moon.All night I heard her cries.  Loud was the wind; the rain beat hardon the hill.  Before morning appeared, her voice was weak; it diedaway like the evening breeze among the grass of the rocks.  Spentwith grief, she expired, and left thee, Armin, alone.  Gone is mystrength in war, fallen my pride among women.  When the stormsaloft arise, when the north lifts the wave on high, I sit by thesounding shore, and look on the fatal rock.

　　"Often by the setting moon I see the ghosts of my children; halfviewless they walk in mournful conference together."

　　A torrent of tears which streamed from Charlotte's eyes and gaverelief to her bursting heart, stopped Werther's recitation.  Hethrew down the book, seized her hand, and wept bitterly.  Charlotteleaned upon her hand, and buried her face in her handkerchief:the agitation of both was excessive.  They felt that their ownfate was pictured in the misfortunes of Ossian's heroes, theyfelt this together, and their tears redoubled.  Werther supportedhis forehead on Charlotte's arm: she trembled, she wished to begone; but sorrow and sympathy lay like a leaden weight upon hersoul.  She recovered herself shortly, and begged Werther, withbroken sobs, to leave her, implored him with the utmost earnestnessto comply with her request.  He trembled; his heart was ready toburst: then, taking up the book again, he recommenced reading, ina voice broken by sobs.

　　"Why dost thou waken me, O spring?  Thy voice woos me, exclaiming,I refresh thee with heavenly dews; but the time of my decay isapproaching, the storm is nigh that shall whither my leaves.Tomorrow the traveller shall come, he shall come, who beheld mein beauty: his eye shall seek me in the field around, but he shallnot find me."

　　The whole force of these words fell upon the unfortunate Werther.Full of despair, he threw himself at Charlotte's feet, seized herhands, and pressed them to his eyes and to his forehead.  Anapprehension of his fatal project now struck her for the firsttime.  Her senses were bewildered: she held his hands, pressedthem to her bosom; and, leaning toward him with emotions of thetenderest pity, her warm cheek touched his.  They lost sight ofeverything.  The world disappeared from their eyes.  He claspedher in his arms, strained her to his bosom, and covered her tremblinglips with passionate kisses.  "Werther!" she cried with a faintvoice, turning herself away;  "Werther!" and, with a feeble hand,she pushed him from her.  At length, with the firm voice of virtue,she exclaimed, "Werther!" He resisted not, but, tearing himselffrom her arms, fell on his knees before her.  Charlotte rose, and,with disordered grief, in mingled tones of love and resentment,she exclaimed, "It is the last time, Werther!  You shall never seeme any more!"  Then, casting one last, tender look upon herunfortunate lover, she rushed into the adjoining room, and lockedthe door.  Werther held out his arms, but did not dare to detainher.  He continued on the ground, with his head resting on thesofa, for half an hour, till he heard a noise which brought himto his senses.  The servant entered.  He then walked up and downthe room; and, when he was again left alone, he went to Charlotte'sdoor, and, in a low voice, said, "Charlotte, Charlotte! but oneword more, one last adieu!"  She returned no answer.  He stopped,and listened and entreated; but all was silent.  At length he torehimself from the place, crying, "Adieu, Charlotte, adieu for ever!"

　　Werther ran to the gate of the town.  The guards, who knew him,let him pass in silence.  The night was dark and stormy, -- itrained and snowed.  He reached his own door about eleven.  Hisservant, although seeing him enter the house without his hat, didnot venture to say anything; and; as he undressed his master, hefound that his clothes were wet.  His hat was afterward found onthe point of a rock overhanging the valley; and it is inconceivablehow he could have climbed to the summit on such a dark, tempestuousnight without losing his life.

　　He retired to bed, and slept to a late hour.  The next morning hisservant, upon being called to bring his coffee, found him writing.He was adding, to Charlotte, what we here annex.

　　"For the last, last time I open these eyes.  Alas! they will beholdthe sun no more.  It is covered by a thick, impenetrable cloud.Yes, Nature! put on mourning: your child, your friend, your lover,draws near his end!  This thought, Charlotte, is without parallel;and yet it seems like a mysterious dream when I repeat -- this ismy last day!  The last!  Charlotte, no word can adequately expressthis thought.  The last!  To-day I stand erect in all my strengthto-morrow, cold and stark, I shall lie extended upon the ground.To die! what is death?  We do but dream in our discourse upon it.I have seen many human beings die; but, so straitened is our feeblenature, we have no clear conception of the beginning or the endof our existence.  At this moment I am my own -- or rather I amthine, thine, my adored! and the next we are parted, severed --perhaps for ever!  No, Charlotte, no!  How can I, how can you,be annihilated?  We exist.  What is annihilation?  A mere word,an unmeaning sound that fixes no impression on the mind.  Dead,Charlotte! laid in the cold earth, in the dark and narrow grave!I had a friend once who was everything to me in early youth.She died.  I followed her hearse; I stood by her grave when thecoffin was lowered; and when I heard the creaking of the cordsas they were loosened and drawn up, when the first shovelfulof earth was thrown in, and the coffin returned a hollow sound,which grew fainter and fainter till all was completely coveredover, I threw myself on the ground; my heart was smitten, grieved,shattered, rent -- but I neither knew what had happened, nor whatwas to happen to me.  Death! the grave!  I understand not the words.-- Forgive, oh, forgive me!  Yesterday -- ah, that day should havebeen the last of my life!  Thou angel! for the first time in myexistence, I felt rapture glow within my inmost soul.  She loves,she loves me!  Still burns upon my lips the sacred fire theyreceived from thine.  New torrents of delight overwhelm my soul.Forgive me, oh, forgive!

　　"I knew that I was dear to you; I saw it in your first entrancinglook, knew it by the first pressure of your hand; but when I wasabsent from you, when I saw Albert at your side, my doubts andfears returned.

　　"Do you remember the flowers you sent me, when, at that crowdedassembly, you could neither speak nor extend your hand to me?Half the night I was on my knees before those flowers, and Iregarded them as the pledges of your love; but those impressionsgrew fainter, and were at length effaced.

　　"Everything passes away; but a whole eternity could not extinguishthe living flame which was yesterday kindled by your lips, andwhich now burns within me.  She loves me!  These arms have encircledher waist, these lips have trembled upon hers.  She is mine!  Yes,Charlotte, you are mine for ever!

　　"And what do they mean by saying Albert is your husband?  He maybe so for this world; and in this world it is a sin to love you,to wish to tear you from his embrace.  Yes, it is a crime; and Isuffer the punishment, but I have enjoyed the full delight ofmy sin.  I have inhaled a balm that has revived my soul.  Fromthis hour you are mine; yes, Charlotte, you are mine!  I gobefore you.  I go to my Father and to your Father.  I will pourout my sorrows before him, and he will give me comfort till youarrive.  Then will I fly to meet you.  I will claim you, andremain your eternal embrace, in the presence of the Almighty.

　　"I do not dream, I do not rave.  Drawing nearer to the grave myperceptions become clearer.  We shall exist; we shall see eachother again; we shall behold your mother; I shall behold her, andexpose to her my inmost heart.  Your mother -- your image!"

　　About eleven o'clock Werther asked his servant if Albert hadreturned.  He answered, "Yes;" for he had seen him pass on horseback:upon which Werther sent him the following note, unsealed:

　　"Be so good as to lend me your pistols for a journey.  Adieu."

　　Charlotte had slept little during the past night.  All herapprehensions were realised in a way that she could neitherforesee nor avoid.  Her blood was boiling in her veins, and athousand painful sensations rent her pure heart.  Was it theardour of Werther's passionate embraces that she felt within herbosom?  Was it anger at his daring?  Was it the sad comparisonof her present condition with former days of innocence, tranquillity,and self-confidence?  How could she approach her husband, andconfess a scene which she had no reason to conceal, and which sheyet felt, nevertheless, unwilling to avow?  They had preserved solong a silence toward each other and should she be the first tobreak it by so unexpected a discovery?  She feared that the merestatement of Werther's visit would trouble him, and his distresswould be heightened by her perfect candour.  She wished that hecould see her in her true light, and judge her without prejudice;but was she anxious that he should read her inmost soul?  On theother hand, could she deceive a being to whom all her thoughtshad ever been exposed as clearly as crystal, and from whom nosentiment had ever been concealed?  These reflections made heranxious and thoughtful.  Her mind still dwelt on Werther, who wasnow lost to her, but whom she could not bring herself to resign,and for whom she knew nothing was left but despair if she shouldbe lost to him for ever.

　　A recollection of that mysterious estrangement which had latelysubsisted between herself and Albert, and which she could neverthoroughly understand, was now beyond measure painful to her.Even the prudent and the good have before now hesitated to explaintheir mutual differences, and have dwelt in silence upon theirimaginary grievances, until circumstances have become so entangled,that in that critical juncture, when a calm explanation wouldhave saved all parties, an understanding was impossible.  Andthus if domestic confidence had been earlier established betweenthem, if love and kind forbearance had mutually animated andexpanded their hearts, it might not, perhaps, even yet have beentoo late to save our friend.

　　But we must not forget one remarkable circumstance.  We mayobserve from the character of Werther's correspondence, thathe had never affected to conceal his anxious desire to quitthis world.  He had often discussed the subject with Albert;and, between the latter and Charlotte, it had not unfrequentlyformed a topic of conversation.  Albert was so opposed to the veryidea of such an action, that, with a degree of irritation unusualin him, he had more than once given Werther to understand that hedoubted the seriousness of his threats, and not only turned theminto ridicule, but caused Charlotte to share his feelings ofincredulity.  Her heart was thus tranquillised when she feltdisposed to view the melancholy subject in a serious point ofview, though she never communicated to her husband theapprehensions she sometimes experienced.

　　Albert, upon his return, was received by Charlotte withill-concealed embarrassment.  He was himself out of humour; hisbusiness was unfinished; and he had just discovered that theneighbouring official with whom he had to deal, was an obstinateand narrow-minded personage.  Many things had occurred to irritatehim.

　　He inquired whether anything had happened during his absence, andCharlotte hastily answered that Werther had been there on theevening previously.  He then inquired for his letters, and wasanswered that several packages had been left in his study.  Hethereon retired, leaving Charlotte alone.

　　The presence of the being she loved and honoured produced a newimpression on her heart.  The recollection of his generosity,kindness, and affection had calmed her agitation: a secret impulseprompted her to follow him; she took her work and went to hisstudy, as was often her custom.  He was busily employed openingand reading his letters.  It seemed as if the contents of somewere disagreeable.  She asked some questions: he gave short answers,and sat down to write.

　　Several hours passed in this manner, and Charlotte's feelingsbecame more and more melancholy.  She felt the extreme difficultyof explaining to her husband, under any circumstances, the weightthat lay upon her heart; and her depression became every momentgreater, in proportion as she endeavoured to hide her grief, andto conceal her tears.

　　The arrival of Werther's servant occasioned her the greatestembarrassment.  He gave Albert a note, which the latter coldlyhanded to his wife, saying, at the same time, "Give him the pistols.I wish him a pleasant journey," he added, turning to the servant.These words fell upon Charlotte like a thunderstroke: she rosefrom her seat half-fainting, and unconscious of what she did.  Shewalked mechanically toward the wall, took down the pistols with atrembling hand, slowly wiped the dust from them, and would havedelayed longer, had not Albert hastened her movements by an impatientlook.  She then delivered the fatal weapons to the servant, withoutbeing able to utter a word.  As soon as he had departed, she foldedup her work, and retired at once to her room, her heart overcomewith the most fearful forebodings.  She anticipated some dreadfulcalamity.  She was at one moment on the point of going to herhusband, throwing herself at his feet, and acquainting him withall that had happened on the previous evening, that she mightacknowledge her fault, and explain her apprehensions; then she sawthat such a step would be useless, as she would certainly be unableto induce Albert to visit Werther.  Dinner was served; and a kindfriend whom she had persuaded to remain assisted to sustain theconversation, which was carried on by a sort of compulsion, tillthe events of the morning were forgotten.

　　When the servant brought the pistols to Werther, the latter receivedthem with transports of delight upon hearing that Charlotte hadgiven them to him with her own hand.  He ate some bread, dranksome wine, sent his servant to dinner, and then sat down to writeas follows:

　　"They have been in your hands you wiped the dust from them.  Ikiss them a thousand times -- you have touched them.  Yes, Heavenfavours my design, and you, Charlotte, provide me with the fatalinstruments.  It was my desire to receive my death from your hands,and my wish is gratified.  I have made inquiries of my servant.You trembled when you gave him the pistols, but you bade me noadieu.  Wretched, wretched that I am -- not one farewell!  Howcould you shut your heart against me in that hour which makes youmine for ever?  Charlotte, ages cannot efface the impression -- Ifeel you cannot hate the man who so passionately loves you!"

　　After dinner he called his servant, desired him to finish thepacking up, destroyed many papers, and then went out to pay sometrifling debts.  He soon returned home, then went out again,notwithstanding the rain, walked for some time in the count'sgarden, and afterward proceeded farther into the country.  Towardevening he came back once more, and resumed his writing.

　　"Wilhelm, I have for the last time beheld the mountains, the forests,and the sky.  Farewell!  And you, my dearest mother, forgive me!Console her, Wilhelm.  God bless you!  I have settled all myaffairs!  Farewell!  We shall meet again, and be happier than ever."

　　"I have requited you badly, Albert; but you will forgive me.  Ihave disturbed the peace of your home.  I have sowed distrustbetween you.  Farewell!  I will end all this wretchedness.  Andoh, that my death may render you happy!  Albert, Albert! make thatangel happy, and the blessing of Heaven be upon you!"

　　He spent the rest of the evening in arranging his papers: he toreand burned a great many; others he sealed up, and directed toWilhelm.  They contained some detached thoughts and maxims, someof which I have perused.  At ten o'clock he ordered his fire tobe made up, and a bottle of wine to be brought to him.  He thendismissed his servant, whose room, as well as the apartments ofthe rest of the family, was situated in another part of the house.The servant lay down without undressing, that he might be thesooner ready for his journey in the morning, his master havinginformed him that the post-horses would be at the door before sixo'clock.

　　"Past eleven o'clock!  All is silent around me, and my soul iscalm.  I thank thee, O God, that thou bestowest strength and courageupon me in these last moments!  I approach the window, my dearestof friends; and through the clouds, which are at this moment drivenrapidly along by the impetuous winds, I behold the stars whichillumine the eternal heavens.  No, you will not fall, celestialbodies: the hand of the Almighty supports both you and me!  I havelooked for the last time upon the constellation of the GreaterBear: it is my favourite star; for when I bade you farewell atnight, Charlotte, and turned my steps from your door, it alwaysshone upon me.  With what rapture have I at times beheld it!  Howoften have I implored it with uplifted hands to witness my felicity!and even still -- But what object is there, Charlotte, which failsto summon up your image before me?  Do you not surround me on allsides? and have I not, like a child, treasured up every triflewhich you have consecrated by your touch?

　　"Your profile, which was so dear to me, I return to you; and Ipray you to preserve it.  Thousands of kisses have I imprintedupon it, and a thousand times has it gladdened my heart on departingfrom and returning to my home.

　　"I have implored your father to protect my remains.  At the cornerof the churchyard, looking toward the fields, there are twolime-trees -- there I wish to lie.  Your father can, and doubtlesswill, do this much for his friend.  Implore it of him.  But perhapspious Christians will not choose that their bodies chould beburied near the corpse of a poor, unhappy wretch like me.  Thenlet me be laid in some remote valley, or near the highway, wherethe priest and Levite may bless themselves as they pass by mytomb, whilst the Samaritan will shed a tear for my fate.

　　"See, Charlotte, I do not shudder to take the cold and fatal cup,from which I shall drink the draught of death.  Your hand presentsit to me, and I do not tremble.  All, all is now concluded: thewishes and the hopes of my existence are fulfilled.  With cold,unflinching hand I knock at the brazen portals of Death.  Oh, thatI had enjoyed the bliss of dying for you! how gladly would I havesacrificed myself for you; Charlotte!  And could I but restorepeace and joy to your bosom, with what resolution, with what joy,would I not meet my fate!  But it is the lot of only a chosen fewto shed their blood for their friends, and by their death toaugment, a thousand times, the happiness of those by whom they arebeloved.

　　I wish, Charlotte, to be buried in the dress I wear at present:it has been rendered sacred by your touch.  I have begged thisfavour of your father.  My spirit soars above my sepulchre.  Ido not wish my pockets to be searched.  The knot of pink ribbonwhich you wore on your bosom the first time I saw you, surroundedby the children -- Oh, kiss them a thousand times for me, andtell them the fate of their unhappy friend!  I think I see themplaying around me.  The dear children!  How warmly have I beenattached to you, Charlotte!  Since the first hour I saw you, howimpossible have I found it to leave you.  This ribbon must beburied with me: it was a present from you on my birthday.  Howconfused it all appears!  Little did I then think that I shouldjourney this road.  But peace!  I pray you, peace!

　　"They are loaded -- the clock strikes twelve.  I say amen.Charlotte, Charlotte! farewell, farewell!"

　　A neighbour saw the flash, and heard the report of the pistol;but, as everything remained quiet, he thought no more of it.

　　In the morning, at six o'clock, the servant went into Werther'sroom with a candle.  He found his master stretched upon the floor,weltering in his blood, and the pistols at his side.  He called,he took him in his arms, but received no answer.  Life was not yetquite extinct.  The servant ran for a surgeon, and then went tofetch Albert.  Charlotte heard the ringing of the bell: a coldshudder seized her.  She wakened her husband, and they both rose.The servant, bathed in tears faltered forth the dreadful news.Charlotte fell senseless at Albert's feet.

　　When the surgeon came to the unfortunate Werther, he was stilllying on the floor; and his pulse beat, but his limbs were cold.The bullet, entering the forehead, over the right eye, hadpenetrated the skull.  A vein was opened in his right arm: theblood came, and he still continued to breathe.

　　>From the blood which flowed from the chair, it could be inferredthat he had committed the rash act sitting at his bureau, and thathe afterward fell upon the floor.  He was found lying on his backnear the window.  He was in full-dress costume.

　　The house, the neighbourhood, and the whole town were immediatelyin commotion.  Albert arrived.  They had laid Werther on the bed:his head was bound up, and the paleness of death was upon his face.His limbs were motionless; but he still breathed, at one timestrongly, then weaker -- his death was momently expected.

　　He had drunk only one glass of the wine.  "Emilia Galotti" layopen upon his bureau.

　　I shall say nothing of Albert's distress, or of Charlotte's grief.

　　The old steward hastened to the house immediately upon hearing thenews: he embraced his dying friend amid a flood of tears.  Hiseldest boys soon followed him on foot.  In speechless sorrow theythrew themselves on their knees by the bedside, and kissed hishands and face.  The eldest, who was his favourite, hung over himtill he expired; and even then he was removed by force.  At twelveo'clock Werther breathed his last.  The presence of the steward,and the precautions he had adopted, prevented a disturbance; andthat night, at the hour of eleven, he caused the body to be interredin the place which Werther had selected for himself.

　　The steward and his sons followed the corpse to the grave.  Albertwas unable to accompany them.  Charlotte's life was despaired of.The body was carried by labourers.  No priest attended.

　　End